MILLIONS OF CATS
Wanda Gag
"The first true 'picture book' by an American artist"
"Beauty at the heart of all life is the keynote to the work of Wanda Gag and the source of its power, whether
expressed in one of her memorable prints or in an intimate picture of the home of the very old man in
MILLIONS OF CATS. Clear memory of her own happy childhood and a kinship with all children made her
respect their intelligence, and gave them at once ease and joy in their company."
WANDA GAG
(Pronouced it "Gaag - to rhyme with jog, not with bag please!)
" Life without a drawing mood is miserable, miserable, miserable....."
"I believe it is just the modern children who need (fairy tales) since their lives are already over-balanced on
the side of steel and stone and machinery." - Wanda Gag
Once upon a time there was a very old man and a very old woman. They lived in a nice
clean house which had flowers all around it, except where the door was. But they couldn’t be happy because
they were so very lonely.
“If only we had a cat!” sighed the very old woman.
“A cat?” asked the very old man.
“Yes, a sweet little fluffy cat,” said the very old woman.
“I will get you a cat, my dear,” said the very old man.
And he set out over the hills to look for one. He climbed over the
sunny hills. He trudged through the cool valleys. He walked a
long, long time and at last he came to a hill which was quite
covered with cats.
Cats here, cats there,
Cats and kittens, everywhere,
Hundreds of cats,
Thousand of cats,
Millions and billions and trillions of cats.
“Oh,” cried the old man joyfully, “Now I can
choose the prettiest cat and take it home with
me!” So he chose one. It was white.
But just as he was about to leave, he saw another
one all black and white and it seemed just as
pretty as the first. So he took this one also.
But then he saw a fuzzy gray kitten way over here
which was every bit as pretty as the others so he
took it too.
And now he saw one way down in a corner, which
he thought too lovely to leave so he took this too.
And now, over there, he saw a cat, which had
brown and yellow stripes like a baby tiger.
“I simply must take it!” cried the very old man,
and he did.
So it happened that every time the very old man looked up, he saw another
cat which was so pretty he could not bear to leave it, and before he knew
it, he had chosen them all.
And so he went back over the sunny hills and down through the cool valleys, to show
all his pretty kittens to the very old woman. It was very funny to see those hundreds
and thousands and millions and billions and trillions of cats following him.
They came to a pond.
“Mew, mew! We are thirsty!” cried the
Hundreds of cats,
Thousands of cats,
Millions and billions and trillions of cats.
“Well, here is a great deal of water,” said the very old man.
Each cat took a sip of water, and the pond was gone!
“Mew, mew! Now we are hungry!” said the
Hundreds of cats,
Thousands of cats,
Millions and billions and trillions of cats.
“There is much grass on the hills,” said the very old man.
Each cat ate a mouthful of grass and not a blade was left!
Pretty soon the very old woman saw them coming.
“My dear!” she cried, “What are you doing?
I asked for one little cat, and what do I see? –
“Cats here, cats there,
Cats and kittens everywhere,
Hundreds of cats,
Thousands of cats,
Millions and billions and trillions of cats.
 “But we can never feed them all,” said the very old woman, “They will eat us out of house and
home.”
“I never thought of that,’ said the very old man, “What shall we do?”
The very old woman thought for a while and then she said, “I know! I will let the cats decide
which one we should keep.”
“Oh yes,” said the very old man, and he called to the cats, “Which one of you is the prettiest?”
“I am!”
“I am!”
“No, I am!”
“No, I am the prettiest!” “I am!”
“No, I am! I am! I am! ” cried hundreds and thousands and millions and billions and trillions of
voices, for each cat thought itself the prettiest.
And they began to quarrel.
They bit and scratched and clawed each other
and made such a great noise that the very old
man and the very old woman ran into the house
as fast as they could. They did not like such
quarrelling. But after a while the noise stopped
and the very old man and the very old woman
peeped out of the window to see what had
happened. They could not see a single cat!
“I think they must have eaten each other all up,” said the very old woman, “It’s too bad!”
“But look!” said the very old man, and he pointed to a bunch of high grass. In it sat one
little frightened kitten. They went out and picked it up. It was thin and scraggly.
 “Poor little kitty,” said the very old woman.
“Dear little kitty,” said the very old man, “how does it happen that you were not
eaten up with all those hundreds and thousands and millions and billions and trillions
of cats?”
“Oh, I’m just a very homely little cat,” said the kitten, “So when you asked who was
the prettiest, I didn’t say anything. So nobody bothered about me.

Every day they gave it plenty
of milk –
“And it is a very pretty cat, after all!” said the very old woman.
“It is the most beautiful cat in the whole world,” said the very old man.
“I ought to know, for I’ve seen –
Hundreds of cats,
Thousands of cats,
Millions and billions and trillions of cats - and not one was as pretty as this one.”

 