The Dark is rising

Part One: The Finding
 Midwinter's Eve


 'Too many!' James shouted, and slammed the door behind him.'What?' said Will.'Too many kids in this
family, that's what. Just too many.'James stood fuming on the landing like a small angry locomotive, then
stumped across to the window-seat and stared out at the garden. Will put aside his book and pulled up
his legs to make room. 'I could hear all the yelling,' he said, chin on knees.

 'Wasn't anything,' James said. 'Just stupid Barbara again. Bossing. Pick up this, don't touch that. And
Mary joining in, twitter twitter, twitter. You'd think this house was big enough, but there's always people.'

 They both looked out of the window. The snow lay thin and apologetic over the world. That wide grey
sweep was the lawn, with the straggling trees of the orchard still dark beyond; the white squares were the
roofs of the garage, the old barn, the rabbit hutches, the chicken coops. Further back there were only the
flat fields of Dawsons' Farm, dimly white-striped. All the broad sky was grey, full of more snow that
refused to fall. There was no colour anywhere.

 'Four days to Christmas,' Will said. 'I wish it would snow properly.'

 'And your birthday tomorrow.'

 'Mmm.' He had been going to say that too, but it would have been too much like a reminder. And the
gift he most wished for on his birthday was something nobody could give him: it was snow, beautiful,
deep, blanketing snow, and it never came. At least this year there was the grey sprinkle, better than
nothing.

 He said, remembering a duty: 'I haven't fed the rabbits yet. Want to come?'

 Booted and muffled, they clumped out through the sprawling kitchen. A full symphony orchestra was
swelling out of the radio; their eldest sister Gwen was slicing onions and singing; their mother was bent
broad-beamed and red-faced over an oven. 'Rabbits!' she shouted, when she caught sight of them. 'And
some more hay from the farm!'

 'We're going!' Will shouted back. The radio let out a sudden hideous crackle of static as he passed the
table. He jumped. Mrs Stanton shrieked, 'Turn that thing DOWN.'

 Outdoors, it was suddenly very quiet. Will dipped out a pail of pellets from the bin in the farm-smelling
barn, which was not really a barn at all, but a long, low building with a tiled roof, once a stable. They
tramped through the thin snow to the row of heavy wooden hutches, leaving dark foot-marks on the hard
frozen ground.

 Opening doors to fill the feed-boxes, Will passed, frowning. Normally the rabbits would be huddled
sleepily in corners, only the greedy ones coming twitch-nosed forward to eat. Today they seemed
restless and uneasy, rustling to and fro, banging against their wooden walls; one or two even leapt back in
alarm when he opened their doors. He came to his favourite rabbit, named Chelsea, and reached in as
usual to rub him affectionately behind the ears, but the animal scuffled back away from him and cringed
into a corner, the pink-rimmed eyes staring up blank and terrified.

 'Hey!' Will said, disturbed. 'Hey James, look at that. What's the matter with him? And all of them?'

 'They seem all right to me.'

 'Well, they don't to me. They're all jumpy. Even Chelsea. Hey, come on, boy - ' But it was no good.

 'Funny,' James said with mild interest, watching. 'I dare say your hands smell wrong. You must have
touched something they don't like. Same as dogs and aniseed, but the other way round.'

 'I haven't touched anything. Matter of fact, I'd just washed my hands when I saw you.'

 'There you are then,' James said promptly. 'That's the trouble. They've never smelt you clean before.
Probably all die of shock.'

 'Ha very ha.' Will attacked him, and they scuffled together, grinning, while the empty pail toppled rattling
on the hard ground. But when he glanced back as they left, the animals were still moving distractedly, not
eating yet, staring after him with those strange frightened wide eyes.

 'There might be a fox about again, I suppose,' James said. 'Remind me to tell Mum.' No fox could get at
the rabbits, in their sturdy row, but the chickens were more vulnerable; a family of foxes had broken into
one of the henhouses the previous winter and carried off six nicely-fattened birds just before
marketing-time. Mrs Stanton, who relied on the chicken-money each year to help pay for eleven
Christmas presents, had been so furious she had kept watch afterwards in the cold barn two nights
running, but the villains had not come back. Will thought that if he were a fox he would have kept clear
too; his mother might be married to a jeweller, but with generations of Buckinghamshire farmers behind
her, she was no joke when the old instincts were roused.
 
 Tugging the handcart, a home-made contraption with a bar joining its shafts, he and James made their
way down the curve of the overgrown drive and out along the road to Dawsons' Farm. Quickly past the
churchyard, its great dark yew trees leaning out over the crumbling wall; more slowly by Rooks' Wood,
on the corner of Church Lane. The tall spinney of horse-chestnut trees, raucous with the calling of the
rooks and rubbish-roofed with the clutter of their sprawling nests, was one of their familiar places.

 'Hark at the rooks! Something's disturbed them.' The harsh irregular chorus was deafening, and when
Will looked up at the tree-tops he saw the sky dark with wheeling birds. They flapped and drifted to and
fro; there were no flurries of sudden movement, only the clamorous interweaving throng of rooks.

 'An owl?'

 'They're not chasing anything. Come on, Will, it'll be getting dark soon.'

 'That's why it's so odd for the rooks to be in a fuss. They all ought to be roosting by now.' Will turned
his head reluctantly down again, but then jumped and clutched his brother's arm, his eye caught by a
movement in the darkening lane that led away from the road where they stood. Church Lane: it ran
between Rooks' Wood and the church- yard to the tiny local church, and then on to the River Thames.

 'Hey!'

 'What's up?'

 'There's someone over there. Or there was. Looking at us.'

 James sighed. 'So what? Just someone out for a walk.'

 'No, he wasn't.' Will screwed up his eyes nervously, peering down the little side road. 'It was a
weird-looking man all hunched over, and when he saw me looking he ran off behind a tree. \iScuttled\i,
like a beetle.'
 
 James heaved at the handcart and set of up the road, making Will run to keep up. 'It's just a tramp, then.
I dunno, everyone seems to be going batty today - Barb and the rabbits and the rooks and now you, all
yak-twitchety-yakking. Come on, let's get that hay. I want my tea.'

 The handcart bumped through the frozen ruts into Dawsons' yard, the great earthen square enclosed by
buildings on three sides, and they smelt the familiar farm-smell. The cowshed must have been mucked out
that day; OldGeorge, the toothless cattleman, was piling dung across the yard. He raised a hand to them.
Nothing missed Old George; he could see a hawk drop from a mile away. Mr Dawson came out of a
barn.

 'Ah,' he said. 'Hay for Stantons' Farm?' It was his joke with their mother, because of the rabbits and the
hens. James said, 'Yes, please.'

 'It's coming,' Mr Dawson said. Old George had disappeared into the barn. 'Keeping well, then? Tell
your mum I'll have ten birds off her tomorrow. And four rabbits. Don't look like that, young Will. If it's
not their happy Christmas, it's one for the folks as'll have them.' He glanced up at the sky, and Will
thought a strange look came over his lined brown face. Up against the lowering grey clouds, two black
rooks were flapping slowly over the farm in a wide circle.

 'The rooks are making an awful din today,' James said. 'Will saw a tramp up by the wood.'

 Mr Dawson looked at Will sharply. 'What was he like?'

 'Just a little old man. He dodged away.'

 'So the Walker is abroad,' the farmer said softly to himself. 'Ah. He would be.'

 'Nasty weather for walking,' James said cheerfully. He nodded at the northern sky over the farmhouse
roof; the clouds there seemed to be growing darker, massing in ominous grey mounds with a yellowish
tinge. The wind was rising too; it stirred their hair, and they could hear a distant rustling from the tops of
the trees.

 'More snow coming,' said Mr Dawson.

 'It's a horrible day,' said Will suddenly, surprised by his own violence; after all, he had wanted snow. But
somehow uneasiness was growing in him. 'It's - creepy, somehow.'

 'It will be a bad night,' said Mr Dawson.

 'There's Old George with the hay,' said James. 'Come on, Will.'

 'You go,' the farmer said. 'I want Will to pick up something for your mother from the house.' But he did
not move, as James pushed the handcart off towards the barn; he stood with his hands thrust deep into
the pockets of his old tweed jacket, looking at the darkening sky.

 'The Walker is abroad,' he said again. 'And this night will be bad, and tomorrow will be beyond
imagining.' He looked at Will, and Will looked back in growing alarm into the weathered face, the bright
dark eyes creased narrow by decades of peering into sun and rain and wind. He had never noticed
before how dark Farmer Dawson's eyes were: strange, in their blue-eyed county.

 'You have a birthday coming,' the farmer said.

 'Mmm,' said Will.

 'I have something for you.' He glanced briefly round the yard, and withdrew one hand from his pocket;
in it, Will saw what looked like a kind of ornament, made of black metal, a flat circle quartered by two
crossed lines. He took it, fingering it curiously. It was about the size of his palm, and quite heavy; roughly
forged out of iron, he guessed, though with no sharp points or edges. The iron was cold to his hand.

 'What is it?' he said.

 'For the moment,' Mr Dawson said, 'just call it something to keep. To keep with you always, all the time.
Put it in your pocket, now. And later on, loop your belt through it and wear it like an extra buckle.'

 Will slipped the iron circle into his pocket. 'Thank you very much,' he said, rather shakily. Mr Dawson,
usually a comforting man, was not improving the day at all.

 The farmer looked at him in the same intent, unnerving way, until Will felt the hair rise on the back of his
neck; then he gave a twisted half-smile, with no amusement in it but a kind of anxiety. 'Keep it safe, Will.
And the less you happen to talk about it, the better. You will need it after the snow comes.' He became
brisk. 'Come on, now, Mrs Dawson has a jar of her mincemeat for your mother.'

 They moved of towards the farmhouse. The farmer's wife was not there, but waiting in the doorway was
Maggie Barnes, the farm's round-faced, red-cheeked dairymaid, who always reminded Will of an apple.
She beamed at them both, holding out a big white crockery jar tied with a red ribbon.

 'Thank you, Maggie,' Farmer Dawson said.

 'Missus said you'd be wanting it for young Will here,' Maggie said. 'She went down the village to see the
vicar for something. How's your big brother, then, Will?'

 She always said this, whenever she saw him; she meant Will's next-to-oldest brother Max. It was a
Stanton family joke that Maggie Barnes at Dawsons' had a thing about Max.

 'Fine, thank you,' Will said politely. 'Grown his hair long. Looks like a girl.'

 Maggie shrieked with delight. 'Get away with you!' She giggled and waved her farewell, and just at the
last moment Will noticed her gaze slip upward past his head. Out of the corner of his eye as he turned, he
thought he saw a flicker of movement by the farmyard gate, as if someone were dodging quickly out of
sight. But when he looked, no one was there.

 With the big pot of mincemeat wedged between two bales of hay, Will and James pushed the handcart
out of the yard. The farmer stood in his doorway behind them; Will could feel his eyes, watching. He
glanced up uneasily at the looming, growing clouds, and half-unwillingly slipped a hand into his pocket to
finger the strange iron circle. 'After the snow comes.' The sky looked as if it were about to fall on them.
He thought: \iwhat's happening\i?

 One of the farm dogs came bounding up, tail waving; then it stopped abruptly a few yards away, looking
at them.

 'Hey, Racer!' Will called.

 The dog's tail went down, and it snarled, showing its teeth.

 'James!' said Will.

 'He won't hurt you. What's the matter?'

 They went on, and turned into the road.

 'It's not that. Something's wrong, that's all. Something's awful. Racer, Chelsea - the animals are all
scared of me.' He was beginning to be really frightened now.

 The noise from the rookery was louder, even though the daylight was beginning to die. They could see
the dark birds thronging over the treetops, more agitated than before, flapping and turning to and fro.
And Will had been right; there was a stranger in the lane, standing beside the churchyard.

 He was a shambling, tattered figure, more like a bundle of old clothes than a man, and at the sight of him
the boys slowed their pace and drew instinctively closer to the cart and to one another. He turned his
shaggy head to look at them.

 Then suddenly, in a dreadful blur of unreality, a hoarse, shrieking flurry was rushing dark down out of the
sky, and two huge rooks swooped at the man. He staggered back, shouting, his hands thrust up to
protect his face, and the birds flapped their great wings in a black vicious whirl and were gone, swooping
up past the boys and into the sky.
 
 Will and James stood frozen, staring, pressed against the bales of hay.

 The stranger cowered back against the gate.

 'Kaaaaaaak ... kaaaaaak ...' came the head-splitting racket from the frenzied flock over the wood, and
then three more whirling black shapes were swooping after the first two, diving wildly at the man and then
away. This time he screamed in terror and stumbled out into the road, his arms still wrapped in defence
round his head, his face down; and he ran. The boys heard the frightened gasps for breath as he dashed
headlong past them, and up the road past the gates of Dawsons' Farm and on towards the village. They
saw bushy, greasy grey hair below a dirty old cap; a torn brown overcoat tied with string, and some
other garment flapping beneath it; old boots, one with a loose sole that made him kick his leg oddly
sideways, half-hopping, as he ran. But they did not see his face.

 The high whirling above their heads was dwindling into loops of slow flight, and the rooks began to settle
one by one into the trees. They were still talking loudly to one another in a long cawing jumble, but the
madness and the violence were not in it now. Dazed, moving his head for the first time, Will felt his cheek
brush against something, and putting his hand to his shoulder, he found a long black feather there. He
pushed it into his jacket pocket, moving slowly, like someone half-awake.

 Together they pushed the loaded cart down the road to the house, and the cawing behind them died to
an ominous murmur, like the swollen Thames in spring.

 James said at last, 'Rooks don't to that sort of thing. They don't attack people. And they don't come
down low when there's not much space. They just don't.'

 'No,' Will said. He was still moving in a detached half- dream, not fully aware of anything except a
curious vague groping in his mind. In the midst of all the din and the flurry, he had suddenly had a strange
feeling stronger than any he had ever known: he had been aware that someone was trying to tell him
something, something that had missed him because he could not understand the words. Not words
exactly; it had been like a kind of silent shout. But he had not been able to pick up the message, because
he had not known how.

 'Like not having the radio on the right station,' he said aloud.

 'What?' said James, but he wasn't really listening. 'What a thing,' he said. 'I s'pose the tramp must have
been trying to catch a rook. And they got wild. He'll be snooping around after the hens and the rabbits, I
bet you. Funny he didn't have a gun. Better tell Mum to leave the dogs in the barn tonight.' He chattered
amiably on as they reached home and unloaded the hay. Gradually Will realised in amazement that all the
shock of the wild, savage attack was running out of James's mind like water, and that in a matter of
minutes even the very fact of its happening had gone.

 Something had neatly wiped the whole incident from James's memory; something that did not want it
reported. Something that knew this would stop Will from reporting it too.

 'Here, take Mum's mincemeat,' James said. 'Let's go in before we freeze. The wind's really getting up -
good job we hurried back.'

 'Yes,' said Will. He felt cold, but it was not from the rising wind. His fingers closed round the iron circle
in his pocket and held it tightly. This time, the iron felt warm.

 The grey world had slipped into the dark by the time they went back to the kitchen. Outside the
window, their father's battered little van stood in a yellow cave of light. The kitchen was even noisier and
hotter than before. Gwen was setting the table, patiently steering her way round a trio of bent figures
where Mr Stanton was peering at some small, nameless piece of machinery with the twins, Robin and
Paul; and with Mary's plump form now guarding it, the radio was blasting out pop music at enormous
volume. As Will approached, it erupted again into a high-pitched screech, so that everyone broke of with
grimaces and howls.

 'Turn that thing OFF!' Mrs Stanton yelled desperately from the sink. But though Mary, pouting, shut off
the crackle and the buried music, the noise level changed very little.

 Somehow it never did when more than half the family was at home. Voices and laughter filled the long
stone-floored kitchen as they sat round the scrubbed wooden table; the two Welsh collies, Raq and Ci,
lay dozing at the far end of the room beside the fire. Will kept away from them; he could not have borne
it if their own dogs had snarled at him. He sat quietly at tea - it was called tea if Mrs Stanton managed to
produce it before five o'clock, supper if it was later, but it was always the same hearty kind of meal - and
kept his plate and his mouth full of sausage to avoid having to talk. Not that anyone was likely to miss
your talk in the cheerful babble of the Stanton family, especially when you were its youngest member.

 Waving at him from the end of the table, his mother called, 'What shall we have for tea tomorrow, Will?'
 
 He said indistinctly, 'Liver and bacon, please.'

 James gave a loud groan.

 'Shut up,' said Barbara, superior and sixteen. 'It's his birthday, he can choose.'

 'But liver,' said James.

 'Serves you right,' Robin said. 'On your last birthday, if I remember right, we all had to eat that revolting
cauliflower cheese.'

 'I made it,' said Gwen, 'and it wasn't revolting.'

 'No offence,' said Robin mildly. 'I just can't bear cauliflower. Anyway you take my point.'

 'I do. I don't know whether James does.'

 Robin, large and deep-voiced, was the more muscular of the twins and not to be trifled with. James said
hastily, 'Okay, okay.'

 'Double-ones tomorrow, Will,' said Mr Stanton from the head of the table. 'We should have some
special kind of ceremony. A tribal rite.' He smiled at his youngest son, his round, rather chubby face
crinkling in affection.

 Mary sniffed. 'On my eleventh birthday, I was beaten and sent to bed.'

 'Good heavens,' said her mother, 'fancy you remembering that. And what a way to describe it. In point
of fact you got one hard wallop on the bottom, and well-deserved, too, as far as I can recollect.'

 'It was my birthday,' Mary said, tossing her pony-tail. 'And I've never forgotten.'

 'Give yourself time,' Robin said cheerfully. 'Three years isn't much.'

 'And you were a very young eleven,' Mrs Stanton said, chewing reflectively.

 'Huh!' said Mary. 'And I suppose Will isn't?'

 For a moment everyone looked at Will. He blinked in alarm at the ring of contemplating faces, and
scowled down into his plate so that nothing of him was visible except a thick slanting curtain of brown
hair. It was most disturbing to be looked at by so many people all at once, or at any rate by more people
than one could look at in return. He felt almost as if he were being attacked. And he was suddenly
convinced that it could in some way be dangerous to have so many people thinking about him, all at the
same time. As if someone unfriendly might \ihear\i ...

 'Will,' Gwen said at length, 'is rather an old eleven.'

 'Ageless, almost,' Robin said. They both sounded solemn and detached, as if they were discussing some
far-off stranger.

 'Let up, now,' said Paul unexpectedly. He was the quiet twin, and the family genius, perhaps a real one:
he played the flute and thought about little else. 'Anyone coming to tea tomorrow, Will?'

 'No. Angus Macdonald's gone to Scotland for Christmas, and Mike's staying with his grannie in
Southall. I don't mind.'

 There was a sudden commotion at the back door, and a blast of cold air; much stamping, and noises of
loud shivering. Max stuck his head into the room from the passage; his long hair was wet and
white-starred. 'Sorry I'm late, Mum, had to walk from the Common. Wow, you should see it out there -
like a blizzard.' He looked at the blank row of faces, and grinned. 'Don't you know it's snowing?'

 Forgetting everything for a moment, Will gave a joyful yell and scrambled with James for the door. 'Real
snow? Heavy?'

 'I'll say,' said Max, scattering drops of water over them as he unwound his scarf. He was the eldest
brother, not counting Stephen, who had been in the Navy for years and seldom came home. 'Here.' He
opened the door a crack, and the wind whistled through again; outside, Will saw a glittering white fog of
fat snowflakes - no trees or bushes visible, nothing but the whirling snow. A chorus of protest came from
the kitchen: 'SHUT THAT DOOR!'

 'There's your ceremony, Will,' said his father. 'Right on time.'

 Much later, when he went to bed, Will opened the bedroom curtain and pressed his nose against the
cold windowpane, and he saw the snow tumbling down even thicker than before. Two or three inches
already lay on the sill, and he could almost watch the level rising as the wind drove more against the
house. He could hear the wind, too, whining round the roof close above him, and in all the chimneys. Will
slept in a slant-roofed attic at the top of the house; he had moved into it only a few months before, when
Stephen, whose room it had always been, had gone back to his ship after a leave. Until then Will had
always shared a room with James - everyone in the family shared with someone else.

 'But my attic ought to be lived in,' his eldest brother had said, knowing how Will loved it.

 On a bookcase in one corner of the room now stood a portrait of Lieutenant Stephen Stanton, R.N.,
looking rather uncomfortable in dress uniform, and beside it a carved wooden box with a dragon on the
lid, filled with the letters he sent Will sometimes from unthinkably distant parts of the world. They made a
kind of private shrine.

 The snow flurried against the window, with a sound like fingers brushing the pane. Again Will heard the
wind moaning in the roof, louder than before; it was rising into a real storm. He thought of the tramp, and
wondered where he had taken shelter. 'The Walker is abroad ... this night will be bad ...' He picked up
his jacket and took the strange iron ornament from it, running his fingers round the circle, up and down
the inner cross that quartered it. The surface of the iron was irregular, but though it showed no sign of
having been polished it was completely smooth - smooth in a way that reminded him of a certain place in
the rough stone floor of the kitchen, where all the roughness had been worn away by generations of feet
turning to come round the corner from the door. It was an odd kind of iron: deep, absolute black, with
no shine to it but no spot anywhere of discolouration or rust. And once more now it was cold to the
touch; so cold this time that Will was startled to find it numbing his fingertips. Hastily he put it down. Then
he pulled his belt out of his trousers, slung untidily as usual over the back of a chair, took the circle, and
threaded it through like an extra buckle, as Mr Dawson had told him. The wind sang in the
window-frame. Will put the belt back in his trousers and dropped them on the chair.

 It was then, without warning, that the fear came.

 The first wave caught him as he was crossing the room to his bed. It halted him stock-still in the middle
of the room, the howl of the wind outside filling his ears. The snow lashed against the window. Will was
suddenly deadly cold, yet tingling all over. He was so frightened that he could not move a finger. In a
flash of memory he saw again the lowering sky over the spinney, dark with rooks, the big black birds
wheeling and circling overhead. Then that was gone, and he saw only the tramp's terrified face and heard
his scream as he ran. For a moment, then, there was only a dreadful darkness in his mind, a sense of
looking into a great black pit. Then the high howl of the wind died, and he was released.

 He stood shaking, looking wildly round the room. Nothing was wrong. Everything was just as usual. The
trouble, he told himself, came from thinking. It would be all right if only he could stop thinking and go to
sleep. He pulled off his dressing-gown, climbed into bed, and lay there looking up at the skylight in the
slanting roof. It was covered grey with snow.

 He switched off the small bedside lamp, and the night swallowed the room. There was no hint of light
even when his eyes had grown accustomed to the dark. Time to sleep. Go on, go to sleep. But although
he turned on his side, pulled the blankets up to his chin, and lay there relaxed, contemplating the cheerful
fact that it would be his birthday when he woke up, nothing happened. It was no good. Something was
wrong.

 Will tossed uneasily. He had never known a feeling like this before. It was growing worse every minute.
As if some huge weight were pushing at his mind, threatening, trying to take him over, turn him into
something he didn't want to be. That's it, he thought: make me into someone else. But that's stupid.
Who'd want to? And make me into what? Something creaked outside the half-open door, and he
jumped. Then it creaked again, and he knew what it was: a certain floorboard that often talked to itself at
night, with a sound so familiar that usually he never noticed it at all. In spite of himself, he still lay listening.
A different kind of creak came from further away, in the other attic, and he twitched again, jerking so that
the blanket rubbed against his chin. You're just jumpy, he said to himself; you're remembering this
afternoon, but really there isn't much to remember. He tried to think of the tramp as someone
unremarkable, just an ordinary man with a dirty overcoat and worn-out boots; but instead all he could
see once more was the vicious diving of the rooks. \i'The Walker is abroad ...'\i Another strange
crackling noise came, this time above his head in the ceiling, and the wind whined suddenly loud, and Will
sat bolt upright in bed and reached in panic for the lamp.
 
 The room was at once a cosy cave of yellow light, and he lay back in shame, feeling stupid. Frightened
of the dark, he thought: how awful. Just like a baby. Stephen would never have been frightened of the
dark, up here. Look, there's the bookcase and the table, the two chairs and the window seat; look, there
are the six little square-riggers of the mobile hanging from the ceiling, and their shadows sailing over there
on the wall. Everything's ordinary. Go to sleep.

 He switched off the light again, and instantly everything was even worse than before. The fear jumped at
him for the third time like a great animal that had been waiting to spring. Will lay terrified, shaking, feeling
himself shake, and yet unable to move. He felt he must be going mad. Outside, the wind moaned,
paused, rose into a sudden howl, and there was a noise, a muffled scraping thump, against the skylight in
the ceiling of his room. And then in a dreadful furious moment, horror seized him like a nightmare made
real; there came a wrenching crash, with the howling of the wind suddenly much louder and closer, and a
great blast of cold; and the Feeling came hurtling against him with such force of dread that it flung him
cowering away.

 Will shrieked. He only knew it afterwards; he was far too deep in fear to hear the sound of his own
voice. For an appalling pitch-black moment he lay scarcely conscious, lost somewhere out of the world,
out in black space. And then there were quick footsteps up the stairs outside his door, and a voice calling
in concern, and blessed light warming the room and bringing him back into life again.

 It was Paul's voice. 'Will? What is it? Are you all right?'

 Slowly Will opened his eyes. He found that he was clenched into the shape of a ball, with his knees
drawn up tight against his chin. He saw Paul standing over him, blinking anxiously behind his
dark-rimmed spectacles. He nodded, without finding his voice. Then Paul turned his head, and Will
followed his looking and saw that the skylight in the roof was hanging open, still swaying with the force of
its fall; there was a black square of empty night in the roof, and through it the wind was bringing in a bitter
midwinter cold. On the carpet below the skylight lay a heap of snow.

 Paul peered at the edge of the skylight frame. 'Catch is broken - I suppose the snow was too heavy for
it. Must have been pretty old anyway, the metal's all rusted. I'll get some wire and fix it up till tomorrow.
Did it wake you? Lord, what a horrible shock. If I woke up like that, you'd find me somewhere under the
bed.'

 Will looked at him in speechless gratitude, and managed a watery smile. Every word in Paul's soothing,
deep voice brought him closer back to reality. He sat up in bed and pulled back the covers.
 
 'Dad must have some wire with that junk in the other attic,' Paul said. 'But let's get this snow out before it
melts. Look, there's more coming in. I bet there aren't many houses where you can watch the snow
coming down on the carpet.'

 He was right: snowflakes were whirling in through the black space in the ceiling, scattering everywhere.
Together they gathered what they could into a misshapen snowball on an old magazine, and Will scuttled
downstairs to drop it in the bath. Paul wired the skylight back to its catch.

 'There now,' he said briskly, and though he did not look at Will, for an instant they understood one
another very well.

 'Tell you what, Will, it's freezing up here - why don't you go down to our room and sleep in my bed?
And I'll wake you when I come up later - or I might even sleep up here if you can survive Robin's
snoring. All right?'

 'All right,' Will said huskily. 'Thanks.'

 He picked up his discarded clothes - with the belt and its new ornament - and bundled them under his
arm, then paused at the door as they went out, and looked back. There was nothing to see, now, except
a dark damp patch on the carpet where the heap of snow had been. But he felt colder than the cold air
had made him, and the sick, empty feeling of fear still lay in his chest. If there had been nothing wrong
beyond being frightened of the dark, he would not for the world have gone down to take refuge in Paul's
room. But as things were, he knew he could not stay alone in the room where he belonged. For when
they were clearing up that heap of fallen snow, he had seen something that Paul had not. It was
impossible, in a howling snow-storm, for anything living to have made that soft unmistakable thud against
the glass that he had heard just before the skylight fell. But buried in the heap of snow, he had found the
fresh black wing-feather of a rook.

 He heard the farmer's voice again\i: This night will be bad. And tomorrow will be beyond imagining.\i



 \bPart One: The Finding
 Midwinter Day\b

 He was woken by music. It beckoned him, lilting and insistent; delicate music, played by delicate
instruments that he could not identify, with one rippling, bell-like phrase
 running through it in a gold thread of delight. There was in this music so much of the deepest
enchantment of all his dreams and imaginings that he woke smiling in pure happiness at the sound. In the
moment of his waking, it began to fade, beckoning as it went, and then as he opened his eyes it was
gone. He had only the memory of that one rippling phrase still echoing in his head, and itself fading so fast
that he sat up abruptly in bed and reached his arm out to the air, as if he could bring it back.

 The room was very still, and there was no music, and yet Will knew that it had not been a dream.

 He was in the twins' room still; he could hear Robin's breathing, slow and deep, from the other bed.
Cold light glimmered round the edge of the curtains, but no one was stirring anywhere; it was very early.
Will pulled on his rumpled clothes from the day before, and slipped out of the room. He crossed the
landing to the central window, and looked down.

 In the first shining moment he saw the whole strange - familiar world, glistening white; the roof of the
outbuildings mounded into square towers of snow, and beyond them all the fields and hedges buried,
merged into one great flat expanse, unbroken white to the horizon's brim. Will drew in a long, happy
breath, silently rejoicing. Then, very faintly, he heard the music again, the same phrase. He swung round
vainly searching for it in the air, as if he might see it some where like a flickering light.

 'Where are you?'

 It had gone again. And when he looked back through the window, he saw that his own world had gone
with it. In that flash, everything had changed. The snow was there as it had been a moment before, but
not piled now on roofs or stretching flat over lawns and fields. There were no roofs, there were no fields.
There were only trees. Will was looking over a great white forest: a forest of massive trees, sturdy as
towers and ancient as rock. They were bare of leaves, clad only in the deep snow that lay untouched
along every branch, each smallest twig. They were everywhere. They began so close to the house that he
was looking out through the topmost branches of the nearest tree, could have reached out and shaken
them if he had dared to open the window. All around him the trees stretched to the flat horizon of the
valley. The only break in that white world of branches was away over to the south, where the Thames
ran; he could see the bend in the river marked like a single stilled wave in this white ocean of forest, and
the shape of it looked as though the river were wider than it should have been.
 
 Will gazed and gazed, and when at last he stirred he found that he was clutching the smooth iron circle
threaded on to his belt. The iron was warm to his touch.

 He went back into the bedroom.

 'Robin!' he said loudly. 'Wake up!' But Robin breathed slowly and rhythmically as before, and did not
stir. He ran into the bedroom next-door, the familiar small room that he had once shared with James, and
shook James roughly by the shoulder. But when the shaking was done, James lay motionless, deeply
asleep.

 Will went out on to the landing again and took a long breath, and he shouted with all his might: 'Wake
up! Wake up, everyone!'


 He did not now expect any response, and none came. There was a total silence, as deep and timeless as
the blanketing snow; the house and everyone in it lay in a sleep that would not be broken.

 Will went downstairs to pull on his boots, and the old sheepskin jacket that had belonged, before him, to
two or three of his brothers in turn. Then he went out of the back door, closing it quietly behind him, and
stood looking out through the quick white vapour of his breath.

 The strange white world lay stroked by silence. No birds sang. The garden was no longer there, in this
forested land. Nor were the outbuildings nor the old crumbling walls. There lay only a narrow clearing
round the house now, hummocked with unbroken snowdrifts, before the trees began, with a narrow path
leading away. Will set out down the white tunnel of the path, slowly, stepping high to keep the snow out
of his boots. As soon as he moved away from the house, he felt very much alone, and he made himself
go on without looking back over his shoulder, because he knew that when he looked, he would find that
the house was gone.

 He accepted everything that came into his mind, without thought or question, as if he were moving
through a dream. But a deeper part of him knew that he was not dreaming. He was crystal-clear awake,
in a Midwinter Day that had been waiting for him to wake into it since the day he had been born, and, he
somehow knew, for centuries before that. \iTomorrow will be beyond imagining\i . . . Will came out of
the white-arched path into the road, paved smooth with snow and edged everywhere by the great trees,
and he looked up between the branches and saw a single black rook flap slowly past, high in the early
sky.

 Turning to the right, he walked up the narrow road that in his own time was called Huntercombe Lane. It
was the way that he and James had taken to Dawsons' Farm, the same road that he had trodden almost
every day of his life, but it was very different now. Now, it was no more than a track through a forest,
great snow-burdened trees enclosing it on both sides. Will moved bright-eyed and watchful through the
silence, until, suddenly, he heard a faint noise ahead of him.

 He stood still. The sound came again, through the muffling trees: a rhythmical, off-key tapping, like a
hammer striking metal. It came in short irregular bursts, as though someone were hammering nails. As he
stood listening, the world around him seemed to brighten a little; the woods seemed less dense, the snow
glittered, and when he looked upward, the strip of sky over Huntercombe Lane was a clear blue. He
realised that the sun had risen at last out of the sullen bank of grey cloud.

 He trudged on towards the sound of hammering, and soon came to a clearing. There was no village of
Huntercombe any more, only this. All his senses sprang to life at once, under a shower of unexpected
sounds, sights, smells. He saw two or three low stone buildings thick-roofed with snow; he saw blue
wood-smoke rising, and smelt it too, and smelt at the same time a voluptuous scent of new-baked bread
that brought the water springing in his mouth. He saw that the nearest of the three buildings was
three-walled, open to the track, with a yellow fire burning bright inside like a captive sun. Great showers
of sparks were spraying out from an anvil where a man was hammering. Beside the anvil stood a tall
black horse, a beautiful gleaming animal; Will had never seen a horse so splendidly midnight in colour,
with no white markings anywhere.

 The horse raised its head and looked full at him, pawed the ground, and gave a low whinny. The smith's
voice rumbled in protest, and another figure moved out of the shadows behind the horse. Will's breath
came faster at the sight of him, and he felt a hollowness in his throat. He did not know why.