THE SECRET GARDEN

Stage 3

'We're alike, you and me,' old Ben Weatherstaff said to
Mary. 'We're not pretty to look at and we're both very
disagreeable.'
Poor Mary! Nobody wants her, nobody likes her. Her
parents have died, and she is sent home from India to live
in her uncle's house in Yorkshire. It is a big old house, with
nearly a hundred rooms, but most of them are shut and
locked. Mary is cross and bored, and lonely. There is
nothing to do all day, and no one to talk to, except old Ben
Weatherstaff, the gardener.
But then Mary learns about the secret garden. The door is
locked and hidden, and the key is lost. No one has been
inside the secret garden for ten years - except the robin,
who flies over the wall. Mary watches the robin, and
wonders where the key is.. .
And then there is that strange crying in the night,
somewhere in the house. It sounds like a child crying...
Frances Hodgson Burnett was born in 1849 and died in
1924, From the age of sixteen she lived mostly in the USA,
but often returned to England. She was a writer all her life
and wrote many books, but The Secret Garden is her most
famous story.
OXFORD BOOKWORMS
Series Editor: Jennifer Bassett 
OXFORD BOOKWORMS
For a full list of titles in all the Oxford Bookworms series,
please refer to the Oxford English catalogue. Titles available include:
Green Series
Stage 2 (700 headwords)
*Alice's Adventures in Wonderland Lewis Carroll
*Anne of Green Gables L. M. Montgomery
The Children of the New Forest Captain Marryat
Five Children and It Edith Nesbit
*Huckleberry Finn Mark Twain
The Jungle Book Rudyard Kipling
Marty Doolin Catherine Cookson
*Robinson Crusoe Daniel Defoe
A Stranger at Green Knowe Lucy M. Boston
Too Old to Rock and Roll Jan Mark (short stories)
*The Call of the Wild Jack London
A Christmas Carol Charles Dickens
The Crown of Violet Geoffrey Trease
Kidnapped Robert Louis Stevenson
Moondial Helen Cresswell
On the Edge Gillian Cross
Stage3(1000 headwords)
"The Prisoner of Zenda Anthony Hope
*The Railway Children Edith Nesbit
*The Secret Garden Frances Hodgson Burnett
Through the Looking-Glass Lewis Carroll
'Who Sir, Me Sir?' K.M.Veyton
The Wind in the Willows Kenneth Grahame
Stage 4 (1400 headwords
•Black Beauty Anna Sewell
The Eagle of the Ninth Rosemary Sutcliff
* Gulliver's Travels Jonathan Swift
* Little Women Louisa May Alcott
Lorna Doone R. D. Blackmore
The Silver Sword Ian Serraillier
A Tale of Two Cities Charles Dickens
*Treasure Island Robert Louis Stevenson
We Didn't Mean to Go to Sea Arthur Ransome
The Whispering Knights Penelope Lively
Black Series
Suggested lilies for younger readers from the main Bookworms list:
Stage 1 (400 headwords)
The Elephant Man Tim Vicary *The Phantom of the Opera Jennifer Bassett
The Monkey's Paw W. W. Jacobs
*Dead Man's Island John Escott
*Dracula Bram Stoker
Under the Moon Rowena Akinyemi
Stage 2 (700 headwords)
Ear-rings from Frankfurt Reg Wright
*Voodoo Island Michael Duckworth
Chemical Secret Tim Vicary
•Skyjack! Tim Vicary
Stage 3 (1000 headwords)
The Star Zoo Harry Gilbert
Wyatt's Hurricane Desmond Bagley
*Cassettes available for these titles.
The
Secret Garden
Frances Hodgson Burnett
retold by Clare West
Illustrated by
Jenny Brackley
OXFORD UNIVERSITY PRESS 
Oxford University Press
Great Clarendon Street, Oxford 0X2 6DP
Oxford New York
Athens Auckland Bangkok Bogota Buenos Aires
Calcutta Cape Town Chennai Dares Salaam Delhi
Florence Hong Kong Istanbul Karachi Kuala Lumpur
Madrid Melbourne Mexico City Mumbai Nairobi Paris
Sao Paulo Singapore Taipei Tokyo Toronto Warsaw
and associated companies in
Berlin Ibadan
OXFORD and OXFORD ENGLISH
are trade marks of Oxford University Press
ISBN 0 19 422721 9
This simplified edition © Oxford University Press 1993
First published 1994
Seventh impression 1999
No unauthorized photocopying
All rights reserved. No part of this publication may
be reproduced, stored in a retrieval system, or transmitted,
in any form or by any means, electronic, mechanical,
photocopying, recording or otherwise, without the prior
written permission of Oxford University Press,
This book is sold subject to the condition that it shall not,
by way of trade or otherwise, be lent, resold, hired out, or
otherwise circulated without the publisher's prior consent
in any form of binding or cover other than that in which it is
published and without a similar condition including this
condition being imposed on the subsequent purchaser.
Typeset by Wyvern Typesetting Ltd, Bristol
Printed in England by Clays Ltd, St Ives plc
1
Little Miss Mary
Nobody seemed to care about Mary. She was born in
India, where her father was a British official. He was
busy with his work, and her mother, who was very beautiful,
spent all her time going to parties. So an Indian woman,
Kamala, was paid to take care of the little girl. Mary was
not a pretty child. She had a thin angry face and thin yellow
hair. She was always giving orders to Kamala, who had to
obey. Mary never thought of other people, but only of
herself. In fact, she was a very selfish, disagreeable, badtempered little girl.
One very hot morning, when she was about nine years
old, she woke up and saw that instead of Kamala there was
a different Indian servant by her bed.
Mary saw that there was a different Indian servant by her bed.
1 
The Secret Garden
'What are you doing here?' she asked crossly. 'Go away!
And send Kamala to me at once!'
The woman looked afraid. 'I'm sorry, Miss Mary, she -
she - she can't come!'
Something strange was happening that day. Some of the
house servants were missing and everybody looked
frightened. But nobody told Mary anything, and Kamala
still did not come. So at last Mary went out into the garden,
and played by herself under a tree. She pretended she was
making her own flower garden, and picked large red
flowers to push into the ground. All the time she was saying
crossly to herself,
'I hate Kamala! I'll hit her when she comes back!'
Just then she saw her mother coming into the garden,
with a young Englishman. They did not notice the child,
who listened to their conversation.
'It's very bad, is it?' her mother asked the young man in
a worried voice.
'Very bad,' he answered seriously. 'People are dying like
flies. It's dangerous to stay in this town. You should go to
the hills, where there's no disease.'
'Oh, I know!' she cried. 'We must leave soon!'
Suddenly they heard loud cries coming from the servants'
rooms, at the side of the house.
'What's happened?' cried Mary's mother wildly,
'I think one of your servants has just died. You didn't tell
me the disease is here, in your house!'
'I didn't know!' she screamed. 'Quick, come with me!'
2
Little Miss Mary
'You didn't tell me the disease is here, in your house!'
And together they ran into the house.
Now Mary understood what was wrong. The terrible
disease had already killed many people in the town, and in
all the houses people were dying. In Mary's house it was
Kamala who had just died. Later that day three more
servants died there.
3 
The Secret Garden
All through the night and the next day people ran in and
out of the house, shouting and crying. Nobody thought of
Mary. She hid in her bedroom, frightened by the strange
and terrible sounds that she heard around her. Sometimes
she cried and sometimes she slept.
When she woke the next day, the house was silent.
'Perhaps the disease has gone,' she thought, 'and
everybody is well again. I wonder who will take care of me
instead of Kamala? Why doesn't someone bring me some
food? It's strange the house is so quiet.'
But just then she heard men's voices in the hall.
'How sad!' said one. 'That beautiful woman!'
'There was a child too, wasn't there?' said the other.
'Although none of us ever saw her.'
Mary was standing in the middle of her room when they
opened the door a few minutes later. The two men jumped
back in surprise.
'My name is Mary Lennox,' she said crossly. 'I was
asleep when everyone was ill, and now I'm hungry.'
'It's the child, the one nobody ever saw!' said the older
man to the other. 'They've all forgotten her!'
'Why was I forgotten?' asked Mary angrily. 'Why has
nobody come to take care of me?'
The younger man looked at her very sadly. 'Poor child!'
he said. 'You see, there's nobody left alive in the house. So
nobody can come.'
In this strange and sudden way Mary learnt that both her
mother and her father had died. The few servants who had
4
Little Miss Mary
not died had run away in the night. No one had remembered
little Miss Mary. She was all alone.
Because she had never known her parents well, she did
not miss them at all. She only thought of herself, as she had
always done.
'Where will I live?' she wondered. 'I hope I'll stay with
people who'll let me do what I want.'
At first she was taken to an English family who had
known her parents. She hated their untidy house and noisy
children, and preferred playing by herself in the garden.
One day she was playing her favourite game, pretending to
make a garden, when one of the children, Basil, offered to
help.
'Go away!' cried Mary. 'I don't want your help!'
For a moment Basil looked angry, and then he began to
laugh. He danced round and round Mary, and sang a funny
little song about Miss Mary and her stupid flowers. This
made Mary very cross indeed. No one had ever laughed at
her so unkindly.
'You're going home soon,' said Basil. 'And we're all very
pleased you're leaving!'
'I'm pleased too,' replied Mary. 'But where's home?'
'You're stupid if you don't know that!' laughed Basil.
'England, of course! You're going to live with your uncle,
Mr Archibald Craven.'
'I've never heard of him,' said Mary coldly.
'But I know about him because I heard Father and
Mother talking,' said Basil. 'He lives in a big lonely old
5 
The Secret Garden
house, and has no friends, because he's so bad-tempered.
He's got a crooked back, and he's horrid!'
'I don't believe you!' cried Mary. But the next day Basil's
parents explained that she was going to live with her uncle
in Yorkshire, in the north of England. Mary looked bored
and cross and said nothing.
After the long sea journey, she was met in London by Mr
Craven's housekeeper, Mrs Medlock. Together they
travelled north by train. Mrs Medlock was a large woman,
with a very red face and bright black eyes. Mary did not like
her, but that was not surprising, because she did not usually
like people. Mrs Medlock did not like Mary either.
'What a disagreeable child!' thought the housekeeper.
'But perhaps I should talk to her.'
6
Little Miss Mary
'I can tell you a bit about your uncle if you like,' she said
aloud. 'He lives in a big old house, a long way from anywhere.
There are nearly a hundred rooms, but most of them are shut
and locked. There's a big park round the house, and all kinds
of gardens. Well, what do you think of that?'
'Nothing,' replied Mary. 'It doesn't matter to me.'
Mrs Medlock laughed. 'You're a hard little girl! Well, if
you don't care, Mr Craven doesn't either. He never spends
time on anyone. He's got a crooked back, you see, and
although he's always been rich, he was never really happy
until he married.'
'Married?' repeated Mary in surprise.
'Yes, he married a sweet, pretty girl, and he loved her
deeply. So when she died—'
'Oh! Did she die?' asked Mary, interested.
'Yes, she did. And now he doesn't care about anybody. If
he's at home, he stays in his room and sees nobody. He
won't want to see you, so you must stay out of his way and
do what you're told.'
Mary stared out of the train window at the grey sky and
the rain. She was not looking forward to life at her uncle's
house.
The train journey lasted all day, and it was dark when
they arrived at the station. Then there was a long drive to
get to the house. It was a cold, windy night, and it was
raining heavily. After a while Mary began to hear a strange,
wild noise. She looked out of the window, but could see
nothing except the darkness.
7 
The Secret Garden
'What's that noise?' she asked Mrs Medlock. 'It's - It's
not the sea, is it?'
'No, that's the moor. It's the sound the wind makes,
blowing across the moor.'
'It's the sound the wind makes, blowing across the moor.'
8
Mary in Yorkshire
'What is a moor?'
'It's just miles and miles of wild land, with no trees or
houses. Your uncle's house is right on the edge of the
moor.'
Mary listened to the strange, frightening sound. 'I don't
like it,' she thought. 'I don't like it.' She looked more
disagreeable than ever.
2
Mary in Yorkshire
T
hey arrived at a very large old house. It looked dark
and unfriendly from the outside. Inside, Mary looked
around the big shadowy hall, and felt very small and lost.
They went straight upstairs. Mary was shown to a room
where there was a warm fire and food on the table.
'This is your room,' said Mrs Medlock. 'Go to bed when
you've had some supper. And remember, you must stay in
your room! Mr Craven doesn't want you to wander all over
the house!'
When Mary woke up the next morning, she saw a young
servant girl cleaning the fireplace. The room seemed dark
and rather strange, with pictures of dogs and horses and
ladies on the walls. It was not a child's room at all. From the
window she could not see any trees or houses, only wild
land, which looked like a kind of purple sea.
9 
The Secret Garden
'Who are you?' she asked the servant coldly.
'Martha, miss,' answered the girl with a smile.
'And what's that outside?' Mary continued.
'That's the moor,' smiled Martha. 'Do you like it?'
'No,' replied Mary immediately. 'I hate it.'
'That's because you don't know it. You will like it. I love
it. It's lovely in spring and summer when there are flowers.
It always smells so sweet. The air's so fresh, and the birds
sing so beautifully, I never want to leave the moor.'
Mary was feeling very bad-tempered. 'You're a strange
servant,' she said. 'In India we don't have conversations with
servants. We give orders, and they obey, and that's that.'
Martha did not seem to mind Mary's crossness.
'I know I talk too much!' she laughed.
'Are you going to be my servant?' asked Mary.
'Well, not really. I work for Mrs Medlock. I'm going to
clean your room and bring you your food, but you won't
need a servant except for those things.'
'But who's going to dress me?'
Martha stopped cleaning, and stared at Mary.
'Tha' canna' dress thysen?' she asked, shocked.
'What do you mean? I don't understand your language!'
'Oh, I forgot. We all speak the Yorkshire dialect here,
but of course you don't understand the... I meant to say,
can't you put on your own clothes?'
'Of course not! My servant always used to dress me.'
'Well! I think you should learn to dress yourself. My
mother always says people should be able to take care of
10
Mary in Yorkshire
themselves, even if they're rich and important.'
Little Miss Mary was furious with Martha. 'It's different
in India where I come from! You don't know anything
about India, or about servants, or about anything! You .. .
you... ' She could not explain what she meant. Suddenly
she felt very confused and lonely. She threw herself down
on the bed and started crying wildly.
Martha stopped cleaning, and stared at Mary.
11 
The Secret Garden
'Now, now, don't cry like that,' Martha said gently. 'I'm
very sorry. You're right, I don't know anything about
anything. Please stop crying, miss.'
She sounded kind and friendly, and Mary began to feel
better and soon stopped crying. Martha went on talking as
she finished her cleaning, but Mary looked out of the
window in a bored way, and pretended not to listen.
'I've got eleven brothers and sisters, you know, miss.
There's not much money in our house. And they all eat so
much food! Mother says it's the good fresh air on the moor
that makes them so hungry. My brother Dickon, he's
always out on the moor. He's twelve, and he's got a horse
which he rides sometimes.'
'Where did he get it?' asked Mary. She had always
wanted an animal of her own, and so she began to feel a
little interest in Dickon.
'Oh, it's a wild horse, but he's a kind boy, and animals
like him, you see. Now you must have your breakfast, miss.
Here it is on the table.'
'I don't want it,' said Mary. 'I'm not hungry.'
'What!' cried Martha. 'My little brothers and sisters would
eat all this in five minutes!'
'Why?' asked Mary coldly.
'Because they don't get enough to eat, that's why, and
they're always hungry. You're very lucky to have the food,
miss.' Mary said nothing, but she drank some tea and ate a
little bread.
'Now put a coat on and run outside to play,' said
12
Mary in Yorkshire
7 don't want it,' said Mary. 'I'm not hungry.'
Martha. 'It'll do you good to be in the fresh air.'
Mary looked out of the window at the cold grey sky.
'Why should I go out on a day like this?' she asked.
'Well, there's nothing to play with indoors, is there?'
Mary realized Martha was right. 'But who will go with
me?' she said.
Martha stared at her. 'Nobody. You'll have to learn to
play by yourself. Dickon plays by himself on the moors for
hours, with the wild birds, and the sheep, and the other
animals.' She looked away for a moment. 'Perhaps I
shouldn't tell you this, but - but one of the walled gardens
is locked up. Nobody's been in it for ten years. It was Mrs
Craven's garden, and when she died so suddenly, Mr
Craven locked it and buried the key - Oh, I must go, I can
hear Mrs Medlock's bell ringing for me.'
13 
The Secret Garden
Mary went downstairs and wandered through the great
empty gardens. Many of the fruit and vegetable gardens
had walls round them, but there were no locked doors. She
saw an old man digging in one of the vegetable gardens, but
he looked cross and unfriendly, so she walked on.
'How ugly it all looks in winter!' she thought. 'But what
a mystery the locked garden is! Why did my uncle bury the
key? If he loved his wife, why did he hate her garden?
Perhaps I'll never know. I don't suppose I'll like him if I ever
meet him. And he won't like me, so I won't be able to ask
him.'
Just then she noticed a robin singing to her from a tree on
the other side of a wall. 'I think that tree's in the secret
garden!' she told herself. 'There's an extra wall here, and
there's no way in.'
She went back to where the gardener was digging, and
spoke to him. At first he answered in a very bad-tempered
way, but suddenly the
robin flew down near
them, and the old man
began to smile. He
looked a different
person then, and Mary
thought how much
nicer people looked
when they smiled. The
gardener spoke gently
Just then she noticed a robin. to the robin, and the
14
Mary in Yorkshire
pretty little bird hopped on the ground near them.
'He's my friend, he is,' said the old man. 'There aren't any
other robins in the garden, so he's a bit lonely.' He spoke in
strong Yorkshire dialect, so Mary had to listen carefully to
understand him.
She looked very hard at the robin. 'I'm lonely too,' she
said. She had not realized this before.
'What's your name?' she asked the gardener.
'Ben Weatherstaff. I'm lonely myself. The robin's my
only friend, you see.'
'I haven't got any friends at all,' said Mary.
Yorkshire people always say what they are thinking, and
old Ben was a Yorkshire moor man. 'We're alike, you and
me,' he told Mary. 'We're not pretty to look at, and we're
both very disagreeable.'
Nobody had ever said this to Mary before. 'Am I really
as ugly and disagreeable as Ben?' she wondered.
Suddenly the robin flew to a tree near Mary and started
singing to her. Ben laughed loudly.
'Well!' he said. 'He wants to be your friend!'
'Oh! Would you please be my friend?' she whispered to
the robin. She spoke in a soft, quiet voice and old Ben
looked at her in surprise.
'You said that really nicely!' he said. 'You sound like
Dickon, when he talks to animals on the moor.'
'Do you know Dickon?' asked Mary. But just then the
robin flew away. 'Oh look, he's flown into the garden with
no door! Please, Ben, how can I get into it?'
15 
The Secret Garden
Ben stopped smiling and picked up his spade. 'You can't,
and that's that. It's not your business. Nobody can find the
door. Run away and play, will you? I must get on with my
work.' And he walked away. He did not even say goodbye.
Ben stopped smiling and picked up his spade.
In the next few days Mary spent almost all her time in the
gardens. The fresh air from the moor made her hungry,-and
she was becoming stronger and healthier. One day she
noticed the robin again. He was on top of a wall, singing to
her. 'Good morning! Isn't this fun! Come this way!' he
seemed to say, as he hopped along the wall Mary began to
laugh as she danced along beside him. 'I know the secret
garden's on the other side of this wall!' she thought
16
Mary in Yorkshire
excitedly. 'And the robin lives there! But where's the door?'
That evening she asked Martha to stay and talk to her
beside the fire after supper. They could hear the wind
blowing round the old house, but the room was warm and
comfortable. Mary only had one idea in her head.
'Tell me about the secret garden,' she said.
'Well, all right then, miss, but we aren't supposed to talk
about it, you know. It was Mrs Craven's favourite garden,
and she and Mr Craven used to take care of it themselves.
They spent hours there, reading and talking. Very happy,
they were. They used the branch of an old tree as a seat. But
one day when she was sitting on the branch, it broke, and
she fell. She was very badly hurt and the next day she died.
That's why he hates the garden so much, and won't let
anyone go in there.'
'How sad!' said Mary. 'Poor Mr Craven!' It was the first
time that she had ever felt sorry for anyone.
Just then, as she was listening to the wind outside, she
heard another noise, in the house.
'Can you hear a child crying?' she asked Martha.
Martha looked confused. 'Er - no,' she replied. 'No, I
think .. . it must be the wind.'
But at that moment the wind blew open their door and
they heard the crying very clearly.
'I told you!' cried Mary.
At once Martha shut the door. 'It was the wind,' she
repeated. But she did not speak in her usual natural way,
and Mary did not believe her.
17 
The Secret Garden
The next day it was very rainy, so Mary did not go out
Instead she decided to wander round the house, looking into
some of the hundred rooms that Mrs Medlock had told her
about. She spent all morning going in and out of dark, silent
rooms, which were full of heavy furniture and old pictures
She saw no servants at all, and was on her way back to her
room for lunch, when she heard a cry. 'It's a bit like the cry that
I heard last night!' she thought. Just then the housekeeper, Mrs
Medlock, appeared, with her keys in her hand.
Just then Mrs Medlock appeared.
'What are you doing here?' she asked crossly.
'I didn't know which way to go, and I heard someone
crying,' answered Mary.
18
Finding the secret garden
'You didn't hear anything! Go back to your room now.
And if you don't stay there, I'll lock you in!'
Mary hated Mrs Medlock for this. There was someone
crying, I know there was!' she said to herself. 'But I'll
discover who it is soon!' She was almost beginning to enjoy
herself in Yorkshire.
3
Finding the secret garden
hen Mary woke up two days later, the wind and rain
had all disappeared, and the sky was a beautiful blue.
'Spring'll be here soon,' said Martha happily. 'You'll
love the moor then, when it's full of flowers and birds.'
'Could I get to the moor?' asked Mary.
'You've never done much walking, have you? I don't
think you could walk the five miles to our cottage!'
'But I'd like to meet your family,' Mary said.
Martha looked at the little girl for a moment. She
remembered how disagreeable Mary had been when she
first arrived. But now, Mary looked interested and friendly.
'I'll ask Mother,' said Martha. 'She can always think of a
good plan. She's sensible and hardworking and kind - I
know you'll like her.'
'I like Dickon, although I've never seen him.'
'I wonder what Dickon will think of you?'
19
W 
The Secret Garden
'He won't like me,' said Mary, 'No one does.'
'But do you like yourself? That's what Mother would
ask.'
'No, not really. I've never thought of that.'
'Well, I must go now. It's my day off, so I'm going home
to help Mother with the housework. Goodbye, miss. See
you tomorrow.'
Mary felt lonelier than ever when Martha had gone, so
she went outside. The sunshine made the gardens look
different. And the change in the weather had even made
Ben Weatherstaff easier to talk to.
'Can you smell spring in the air?' he asked her. 'Things
are growing, deep down in the ground. Soon you'll see little
green shoots coming up - young plants, they are. You
watch them.'
'I will,' replied Mary. 'Oh,
there's the robin!' The little bird
hopped on to Ben's spade, 'Are
things growing in the garden
where he lives?'
'What garden?' said Ben, in his
bad-tempered voice.
'You know, the secret garden.
Are the flowers dead there?' She
really wanted to know the answer.
'Ask the robin,' said Ben
'Soon you'll see little green crossly. He's the only one who's
shoots coming up.' been in there for the last ten years.'
20
Finding the secret garden
Ten years was a long time, Mary thought. She had been
born ten years ago. She walked away, thinking. She had
begun to like the gardens, and the robin, and Martha and
Dickon and their mother. Before she came to Yorkshire,
she had not liked anybody.
She was walking beside the long wall of the secret
garden, when a most wonderful thing happened. She
suddenly realized the robin was following her. She felt very
pleased and excited by this, and cried out, 'You like me,
don't you? And I like you too!' As he hopped along beside
her, she hopped and sang too, to show him that she was his
friend. Just then he stopped at a place where a dog had dug
a hole in the ground. As Mary looked at the hole, she
noticed something almost buried there. She put her hand in
and pulled it out. It was an old key.
'Perhaps it's been buried
for ten years,' she whispered
to herself. 'Perhaps it's the
key to the secret garden!'
She looked at it for a long
time. How lovely it would
be to find the garden, and
see what had happened to it
in the last ten years! She
could play in it all by herself,
and nobody would know
she was there. She put the
key safely in her pocket. It was an old key.
21 
The Secret Garden
The next morning Martha was back at Misselthwaite
Manor, and told Mary all about her day with her family.
'I really enjoyed myself. I helped Mother with the whole
week's washing and baking. And I told the children about
you. They wanted to know about your servants, and the
ship that brought you to England, and everything!'
'I can tell you some more for next time,' offered Mary.
'They'd like to hear about riding on elephants and camels
wouldn't they?' '
'Oh, that would be kind of you, miss! And look, Mother
has sent you a present!'
They'd like to hear about riding on elephants
and camels, wouldn't they?'
22
Finding the secret garden
'A present!' repeated Mary. How could a family of
fourteen hungry people give anyone a present!
'Mother bought it from a man who came to the door to
sell things. She told me, "Martha, you've brought me your
pay, like a good girl, and we need it all, but I'm going to buy
something for that lonely child at the Manor," and she
bought one, and here it is!'
It was a skipping-rope. Mary stared at it.
'What is it?'she asked.
'Don't they have skipping-ropes in India? Well, this is
how you use it. Just watch me.'
Martha took the rope and ran into the middle of the
room. She counted up to a hundred as she skipped.
'That looks lovely,' said Mary. 'Your mother is very
kind. Do you think I could ever skip like that?'
'Just try,' said Martha. 'Mother says it'll make you
strong and healthy. Skip outside in the fresh air.'
Mary put her coat on and took the skipping-rope. As she
was opening the door, she thought of something and
turned round.
'Martha, it was your money really. Thank you.' She
never thanked people usually and she did not know how to
do it. So she held out her hand, because she knew that
adults did that.
Martha shook her hand and laughed. 'You're a strange
child,' she said. 'Like an old woman! Now run away and
play!'
The skipping-rope was wonderful. Mary counted and
23 
The Secret Garden
Mary skipped and counted until her face was hot and red.
skipped, skipped and counted, until her face was hot and
red. She was having more fun than she had ever had before.
She skipped through the gardens until she found Ben
Weatherstaff, who was digging and talking to his robin.
She wanted them both to see her skip.
'Well!' said Ben. 'You're looking fine and healthy today!
Go on skipping. It's good for you.'
Mary skipped all the way to the secret garden wall. And
there was the robin! He had followed her! Mary was very
pleased.
'You showed me where the key was yesterday,' she
laughed. 'I've got it in my pocket. So you ought to show me
the door today!'
24
finding the secret garden
The robin hopped on to an old climbing plant on the
wall, and sang his most beautiful song. Suddenly the wind
made the plant move, and Mary saw something under the
dark green leaves. The thick, heavy plant was covering a
door. Mary's heart was beating fast and her hands were
shaking as she pushed the leaves away and found the keyhole. She took the key out of her pocket, and it fitted the
hole. Using both hands, she managed to unlock the door.
Then she turned round to see if anyone was watching. But
there was no one, so she pushed the door, which opened,
slowly, for the first time in ten years. She walked quickly in
and shut the door behind her. At last she was inside the
secret garden!
It was the loveliest, most exciting place she had ever
seen. There were old rose trees everywhere, and the walls
were covered with climbing roses. She looked carefully at
the grey branches. Were the roses still alive? Ben would
know. She hoped they weren't all dead. But she was inside
the wonderful garden, in a world of her own. It seemed very
strange and silent, but she did not feel lonely at all. Then she
noticed some small green shoots coming up through the
grass. So something was growing in the garden after all!
When she found a lot more shoots in different places, she
decided they needed more air and light, so she began to pull
out the thick grass around them. She worked away, clearing
the ground, for two or three hours, and had to take her coat
off because she got so hot. The robin hopped around,
pleased to see someone gardening.
25 
The Secret Garden
It was the loveliest, most evening place Mary had ever seen
26
Finding the secret garden
She almost forgot about lunch, and when she arrived
back in her room, she was very hungry and ate twice as
much as usual. 'Martha,' she said as she was eating, 'I've
been thinking. This is a big, lonely house, and there isn't
much for me to do. Do you think, if I buy a little spade, I can
make my own garden?'
'That's just what Mother said,' replied Martha. 'You'd
enjoy digging and watching plants growing. Dickon can
get you a spade, and some seeds to plant, if you like.'
'Oh , thank you,
Martha! I've got some
money that Mrs Medlock
gave me. Will you write
and ask Dickon to buy
them for me?'
'I will. And he'll bring 'Dicko n can get you some
them to you himself.' seeds to plant.'
'Oh! Then I'll see him.' Mary looked very excited. Then
she remembered something. 'I heard that cry in the house
again, Martha. It wasn't the wind this time. I've heard it
three times now. Who is it?'
Martha looked uncomfortable. 'You mustn't go
wandering around the house, you know. Mr Craven
wouldn't like it. Now I must go and help the others
downstairs. I'll see you at tea-time.'
As the door closed behind Martha, Mary thought to
herself, This really is the strangest house that anyone ever
lived in.' 
4
Meeting Dickon
Mary spent nearly a week working in the secret
garden. Each day she found new shoots coming out
of the ground. Soon, there would be flowers everywhere -
thousands of them. It was an exciting game to her. When
she was inside those beautiful old walls, no one knew
where she was.
During that week she became more friendly with Ben,
who was often digging in one of the vegetable gardens.
'What are your favourite flowers, Ben?' she asked him
one day.
'Roses. I used to work for a young lady who loved roses,
you see, and she had a lot in her garden. That was ten years
ago. But she died. Very sad, it was.'
'What happened to the roses?' asked Mary.
'They were left there, in the garden.'
'If rose branches look dry and grey, are they still alive?'
asked Mary. It was so important to know!
'In the spring they'll show green shoots, and then - But
why are you so interested in roses?' he asked.
Mary's face went red. 'I just. . . wanted to pretend I've
got a garden. I haven't got anyone to play with.'
'Well, that's true,' said Ben. He seemed to feel sorry for
her. Mary decided she liked old Ben, although he was
sometimes bad-tempered.
She skipped along and into the wood at the end of the
28
Meeting Dickon
gardens. Suddenly she heard a strange noise, and there in
front of her was a boy. He was sitting under a tree, playing
on a wooden pipe. He was about twelve, with a healthy red
face and bright blue eyes. There was a squirrel and a crow
in the tree, and two rabbits sitting on the grass near him.
There was a squirrel and a crow in the tree, and two
rabbits sitting on the grass near him.
29 
The Secret Garden
'They're listening to the music!' thought Mary. 'I mustn't
frighten them!' She stood very still.
The boy stopped playing. 'That's right,' he said. 'Animals
don't like it if you move suddenly. I'm Dickon and you must be
Miss Mary. I've brought you the spade and the seeds.'
He spoke in an easy, friendly way. Mary liked him at
once. As they were looking at the seed packets together, the
robin hopped on to a branch near them. Dickon listened
carefully to the robin's song.
'He's saying he's your friend,' he told Mary.
'Really? Oh, I am pleased he likes me. Can you understand
everything that birds say?'
'I think I do, and they think I do. I've lived on the moor
with them for so long. Sometimes I think I am a bird or an
animal, not a boy at all!' His smile was the widest she had
ever seen.
He explained how to plant the seeds. Suddenly he said, 'I
can help you plant them! Where's your garden?'
Mary went red, then white. She had never thought of
this. What was she going to say?
'Could you keep a secret? It's a great secret. If anyone
discovers it, I'll.. .I'll die!'
'I keep secrets for all the wild birds and animals on the
moor. So I can keep yours too,' he replied.
'I've stolen a garden,' she said very fast. 'Nobody goes
into it, nobody wants it. I love it and nobody takes care of
it! They're letting it die!' And she threw her arms over her
face and started crying.
30
Meeting Dickon
'Don't cry,' said Dickon gently. 'Where is it?'
'Come with me and I'll show you,' said Miss Mary.
They went to the secret garden and entered it together.
Dickon walked round, looking at everything.
'Martha told me about this place, but I never thought I'd
see it,' he said. 'It's wonderful!'
'What about the roses?' asked Mary worriedly. 'Are
they still alive? What do you think?'
'Look at these shoots on the branches. Most of them are
alive ail right.' He took out his knife and cut away some of
the dead wood from the rose trees. Mary showed him the
work she had done in the garden, and they talked as they
cut and cleared.
'Dickon,' said Mary suddenly, 'I like you. I never thought
I'd like as many as five people!'
'Only five!' laughed Dickon.
He did look funny when he laughed, thought Mary.
'Yes, your mother, Martha, the robin, Ben, and you.'
Then she asked him a question in Yorkshire dialect,
because that was his language.
'Does tha' like me?' was her question.
'Of course! I likes thee wonderful!' replied Dickon, a big
smile on his round face. Mary had never been so happy.
When she went back to the house for her lunch, she told
Martha about Dickon's visit.
'I've got news for you too,' said Martha. 'Mr Craven's
come home, and wants to see you! He's going away again
tomorrow, for several months.'
31 
The Secret Garden
'Oh!' said Mary. That was good news. She would have
all summer in the secret garden before he came back. Bur
she must be careful. He mustn't guess her secret now.
Just then Mrs Medlock arrived, in her best black dress,
to take Mary down to Mr Craven's room.
Mary's uncle had black hair with some white in it, and
high, crooked shoulders. His face was not ugly, but very
sad. During their conversation he watched her in a worried
way. Perhaps he was thinking of other things at the same
time.
He looked at the thin child. 'Are you well?' he asked.
Mary tried to keep her voice calm as she replied,
'I'm getting stronger and healthier.'
Mary's uncle had black hair with some white in it,
and high, crooked shoulders.
32
Meeting Dickon
'What do you want to do, in this big empty house?'
' I. . . I just want to play outside - I enjoy that.'
'Yes, Martha's mother, Susan Sowerby, spoke to me the
other day. She's a sensible woman - and she said you
needed fresh air. But where do you play?'
'Everywhere! I just skip and run - and look for green
shoots. I don't damage anything!'
'Don't look so frightened! Of course a child like you
couldn't damage anything. Play where you like. Is there
anything that you want?'
Mary came a step nearer to him, and her voice shook a
little as she spoke. 'Could I - could I have a bit of garden?'
Mr Craven looked very surprised.
'To plant seeds in .. . to make them come alive!' Mary
went on bravely. 'It was too hot in India, so I was always ill
and tired there. But here it's different. I .. . I love the
garden!'
He passed a hand quickly over his eyes. Then he looked
kindly at Mary. 'I knew someone once who loved growing
things, like you. Yes, child, take as much of the garden as
you want.' He smiled gently at her. 'Now leave me. I'm very
tired.'
Mary ran all the way back to her room.
'Martha!' she shouted. 'Mr Craven's really a nice man,
but he looks very unhappy, He said I can have my own
garden!'
She was planning to work in the garden with Dickon
every day, to make it beautiful for the summer. 
5
Meeting Colin
I
n the middle of the night Mary woke up. Heavy rain had
started falling again, and the wind was blowing violently
round the walls of the old house. Suddenly she heard crying
again. This time she decided to discover who it was. She left
her room, and in the darkness followed the crying sound,
round corners and through doors, up and down stairs, to
the other side of the big house. At last she found the right
room. She pushed the door open and went in.
It was a big room with beautiful old furniture and
pictures. In the large bed was a boy, who looked tired and
cross, with a thin, white, tearful face. He stared at Mary.
'Who are you?' he whispered. 'Are you a dream?'
'Who are you?' the boy whispered.
34
Meeting Colin
'No, I'm not. I'm Mary Lennox. Mr Craven's my uncle.'
'He's my father,' said the boy. 'I'm Colin Craven.'
'No one ever told me he had a son!' said Mary, very
surprised.
'Well, no one ever told me you'd come to live here. I'm
ill, you see. I don't want people to see me and talk about me.
If I live, I may have a crooked back like my father, but I'll
probably die.'
'What a strange house this is!' said Mary. 'So many
secrets! Does your father come and see you often?'
'Not often. He doesn't like seeing me because it makes
him remember my mother. She died when I was born, so he
almost hates me, I think.'
'Why do you say you're going to die?' asked Mary.
'I've always been ill. I've nearly died several times, and
my back's never been strong. My doctor feels sure that I'm
going to die. But he's my father's cousin, and very poor, so
he'd like me to die. Then he'd get all the money when my
lather dies. He gives me medicine and tells me to rest. We
had a grand doctor from London once, who told me to go
out in the fresh air and try to get well. But I hate fresh air.
And another thing, all the servants have to do what I want,
because if I'm angry, I become ill.'
Mary thought she liked this boy, although he seemed so
strange. He asked her lots of questions, and she told him all
about her life in India.
'How old are you?' he asked suddenly.
'I'm ten, and so are you,' replied Mary, forgetting to be
35 
The Secret Garden
careful, 'because when you were born the garden door was
locked and the key was buried. And I know that was ten
years ago.'
Colin sat up in bed and looked very interested. 'What
door? Who locked it? Where's the key? I want to see it. Ill
make the servants tell me where it is. They'll take me there
and you can come too.'
'Oh, please! Don't - don't do that!' cried Mary.
Colin stared at her. 'Don't you want to see it?'
'Yes, but if you make them open the door, it will never be
a secret again. You see, if only we know about it, if we - if
we can find the key, we can go and play there every day. We
can help the garden come alive again. And no one will
know about it- except us!'
'I see,' said Colin slowly. 'Yes, I'd like that. It'll be our
secret. I've never had a secret before.'
'And perhaps,' added Mary cleverly, 'we can find a boy
to push you in your wheelchair, if you can't walk, and we
can go there together without any other people. You'll feel
better outside. I know I do.'
'I'd like that,' he said dreamily. 'I think I'd like fresh air,
in a secret garden.'
Then Mary told him about the moor, and Dickon, and
Ben Weatherstaff, and the robin, and Colin listened to it all
with great interest. He began to smile and look much
happier.
'I like having you here,' he said. 'You must come and see
me every day. But I'm tired now.'
36
Meeting Colin
'I'll sing you a song. My servant Kamala used to do that
in India,' said Mary, and very soon Colin was asleep.
The next afternoon Mary visited Colin again, and he
seemed very pleased to see her. He had sent his nurse away
and had told nobody about Mary's visit. Mary had not told
anybody either. They read some of his books together, and
told each other stories. They were enjoying themselves and
laughing loudly when suddenly the door opened. Dr Craven
and Mrs Medlock came in. They almost fell over in
surprise.
'What's happening here?' asked Dr Craven.
Colin sat up straight. To Mary he looked just like an
Indian prince. 'This is my cousin, Mary Lennox,' he said
calmly. 'I like her. She must visit me often.'
'Oh, I'm sorry, sir,' said poor Mrs Medlock to the
To Mary he looked just like an Indian prince.
37 
The Secret Garden
doctor. 'I don't know how she discovered him. I told the
servants to keep it a secret.'
'Don't be stupid, Medlock,' said the Indian prince
coldly. 'Nobody told her. She heard me crying and found
me herself. Bring our tea up now.'
'I'm afraid you're getting too hot and excited, my boy,'
said Dr Craven. 'That's not good for you. Don't forget
you're ill.'
'I want to forget!' said Colin. 'I'll be angry if Mary
doesn't visit me! She makes me feel better.'
Dr Craven did not look happy when he left the room.
'What a change in the boy, sir!' said the housekeeper.
'He's usually so disagreeable with all of us. He really seems
to like that strange little girl. And he does look better.' Dr
Craven had to agree.
6
Colin is afraid
Because it rained all the next week, Mary went to talk to
Colin every day instead of visiting the garden. But she
woke early one morning to see the sun shining into her
room, and she ran out to the secret garden at once. She did
not even wait to have her breakfast. It was beautifully
sunny and warm, and a thousand more shoots were
pushing their way out of the ground. Dickon was already
38
Colin is afraid
there, digging hard, with the crow and a young fox beside him.
'Have you seen the robin?' he asked Mary. The little bird
was flying busily backwards and forwards as fast as he
could, carrying pieces of dry grass.
'He's building a nest!' whispered Mary. They watched
the robin for a moment. Then Mary said,
'I must tell you something. You probably know about
Colin Craven, don't you? Well, I've met him, and I'm going
to help him to get better.'
'He's building a nest!' whispered Mary.
39 
The Secret Garden
'That's good news.' There was a big smile on Dickon's
honest face. 'We all knew he was ill.'
'He's afraid he'll have a crooked back like his father. I
think that's what's making him ill.'
'Perhaps we can bring him here and Jet him rest under the
trees. That'll do him good. That's what we'll do.'
They had a Jot of gardening and planning to do and
Mary did not have time to visit Colin that day. When she
came back to the house in the evening, Martha told her that
the servants had had trouble with Colin.
'He's been very bad-tempered all afternoon with all of
us, because you didn't come, miss,'
'Well, I was busy. He'll have to learn not to be so selfish,'
replied Mary coldly. She forgot how selfish she had been
when she was ill in India. 'I'll go and see him now.'
When she went into his room, he was lying in bed,
looking tired. He did not turn to look at her.
'What's the matter with you?' she asked crossly.
'My back aches and my head hurts. Why didn't you
come this afternoon?'
'I was working in the garden with Dickon.'
'I won't let that boy come to the garden if you stay with
him instead of talking to me!'
Mary suddenly became very angry. 'If you send Dickon
away, I'll never come into this room again!'
'You'll have to, if I say so. I'll make the servants bring
you in here.'
'Oh, will you, prince! But no one can make me talk to
40
Colin is afraid
you. I won't look at you. I'll stare at the floor!'
'You selfish girl!' cried Colin.
'You're more selfish than I am. You're the most selfish
boy I've ever met!'
'I'm not as selfish as your fine Dickon! He keeps you
playing outside when he knows I'm ill and alone!'
Mary had never been so furious. 'Dickon is nicer than
any other boy in the world! He's like an angel!'
'An angel! Don't make me laugh! He's just a poor
country boy, with holes in his shoes!'
'He's a thousand times better than you are!'
Colin had never argued with anyone like himself in his
life, and in fact it was good for him. But now he was
beginning to feel sorry for himself.
'I'm always ill,' he said, and started to cry. 'I'm sure my
back is a bit crooked. And I'm going to die!'
'No, you're not!' said Mary crossly.
Colin opened his eyes very wide. Nobody had said that
to him before. He was angry, but a bit pleased at the same
time. 'What do you mean? You know I'm going to die!
Everybody says I'm going to die!'
'I don't believe it!' said Mary in her most disagreeable
voice, 'You just say that to make people feel sorry for you.
You're too horrid to die!'
Colin forgot about his painful back and sat up in bed,
Get out of the room at once!' he shouted, and threw a book
at her.
'Im going,' Mary shouted in reply, 'and I won't come
41 
The Secret Garden
'
Get out of the room at once!' Colin shouted.
back!' The door banged shut behind her.
When she reached her own room, she had decided never
to tell him her great secret. 'He can stay in his room and die
if he wants!' she thought. But soon she began to remember
how ill he had been, and how frightened he was, frightened
that one day his back would become as crooked as his
father's. 'Perhaps . . . perhaps I'll go back and see him
tomorrow!'
That night she was woken by the most terrible screams
that she had ever heard. Servants were opening and shutting
doors and running about.
42
Colin is afraid
'It's Colin!' thought Mary. 'He'll go on screaming until
he makes himself really ill! How selfish he is! Somebody
should stop him!'
Just then Martha ran into the room. 'We don't know
what to do!' she cried. 'He likes you, miss! Come and see if
you can make him calmer, please!'
'Well, I'm very cross with him,' said Mary, and jumped
out of bed. 'I'm going to stop him!'
'That's right,' said Martha. 'He needs someone like you,
to argue with. It'll give him something new to think about.'
Mary ran into Colin's room, right up to his bed.
'Stop screaming!' she shouted furiously. 'Stop at once! I
hate you! Everybody hates you! You'll die if you go on
screaming like this, and I hope you will!'
The screams stopped immediately. This was the first
time that anyone had spoken so angrily to Colin, and he
was shocked. But he went on crying quietly to himself.
'My back's becoming crooked, I can feel it! I know I'm
going to die!' Large tears ran down his face.
'Don't be stupid!' cried Mary. 'There's nothing the
matter with your horrid back! Martha, come here and help
me look at his back!'
Martha and Mrs Medlock were standing at the door,
staring at Mary, their mouths half open. They both looked
very frightened. Martha came forward to help, and Miss
Mary looked carefully at Colin's thin white back, up and
down. Her face was serious and angry at the same time.
The room was very quiet.
43 
The Secret Garden
'There's nothing wrong with
your back!' Mary said at last.
'There's nothing wrong
with your back!' she said at
last. 'Nothing at all! It's as
straight as mine!'
Only Colin knew how
important those crossly
spoken, childish words were.
All his life he had been afraid
to ask about his back, and his
terrible fear had made him ill.
Now an angry little girl told
him his back was straight, and
he believed her. He was no
longer afraid.
They were both calmer now. He gave Mary his hand. 'I
think - I'm almost sure I will live, if we can go out in the
garden together sometimes. I'm very tired now. Will you
stay with me until I go to sleep?'
The servants went out very quietly.
'I'll tell you all about the secret garden,' whispered
Mary. 'I think it's full of roses and beautiful flowers. Birds
like making their nests there because it's so quiet and safe.
And perhaps our robin... '
But Colin was already asleep.
The next day Mary met Dickon as usual in the secret
garden, and told him about Colin. Mary loved Dickon's
Yorkshire dialect and was trying to learn it herself. She
spoke a little now.
44
Colin is afraid
'We mun get poor Colin out here in th' sunshine - an' we
munnot lose no time about it!'
Dickon laughed. 'Well done! I didn't know you could
speak Yorkshire! You're right. We must bring Colin to the
garden as soon as we can,'
So that afternoon she went to see Colin.
'I'm sorry I said I'd send Dickon away,' he said. 'I hated
you when you said he was like an angel!'
'Well, he's a funny kind of angel, but he understands wild
animals better than anyone.' Suddenly, Mary knew that this
was the right moment to tell him. She caught hold of his hands.
'Colin, this is important. Can you keep a secret?'
'Yes-yes!' he whispered excitedly. 'What is it?'
'We've found the door into the secret garden!'
'Oh Mary! Will I live long enough to see it?'
'Of course you will! Don't be stupid!' said Mary crossly.
Hut it was a very natural thing to say, and they both
laughed.
Colin told Mrs Medlock and the doctor that he wanted
to go out in his wheelchair. At first the doctor was worried
the boy would get too tired, but when he heard that Dickon
would push the wheelchair, he agreed.
'Dickon's a sensible boy,' he told Colin. 'But don't
forgot-—'
'I've told you, I want to forget that I'm ill,' said Colin
in his prince's voice. 'Don't you understand? It's because
my cousin makes me forget that I feel better when I'm
with her.' 
7
Colin and the garden
Of course, it was most important that no one should see
Colin, Mary, or Dickon entering the secret garden. So
Colin gave orders to the gardeners that they must all keep
away from that part of the garden in future.
The next afternoon Colin was carried downstairs by a
man servant, and put in his wheelchair outside the front
door. Dickon arrived, with his crow, two squirrels and the
fox, and started pushing the wheelchair gently away from
the house, and into the gardens. Mary walked beside the
chair.
Spring had really arrived now and it seemed very exciting
to Colin, who had lived indoors for so long. He smelt the
warm air from the moor, and watched the little white
clouds in the blue sky. In a very short time he heard Mary
say, 'This is where I found the key .. . and this is the door
. . . and this.., this is the secret garden!'
Colin covered his eyes with his hands until he was inside
the four high walls, and the door was shut again. Then he
looked round at the roses climbing the old red walls, the
pink and white flowers on the fruit trees, and the birds and
the butterflies everywhere. The sun warmed his face, and
he suddenly knew he felt different.
'Mary! Dickon!' he cried. 'I'm going to get better! I'm
going to live for ever and ever and ever!'
As Dickon pushed the wheelchair all round the garden,
46
Colin and the garden
he told Colin the names of all the plants. The sun shone, the
birds sang, and in every corner of the garden there was
something interesting to look at. The three children talked
and laughed, and by the end of the afternoon all three were
speaking Yorkshire together.
'I'll come back here every afternoon,' said Colin. 'I want
to watch things growing.'
'Soon you'll be strong enough to walk and dig. You'll be
Dickon pushed the wheelchair all round the garden.
47 
The Secret Garden
able to help us with the gardening,' said Dickon kindly,
'Do you really think I'll be able to.. . to walk and... dig?'
asked Colin.
'Of course you will. You've got legs, like us!'
'But they're not very strong,' answered Colin. 'They
shake, and . .. and I'm afraid to stand on them.'
'When you want to use them, you'll be able to,' said
Dickon. The garden was quiet for a moment.
Suddenly Colin said, 'Who's that?' Mary turned her
head, and noticed Ben Weatherstaff's angry face looking at
her over the garden wall,
'What are you doing in that garden, young miss?' he
shouted, He had not seen Colin or Dickon.
'The robin showed me the way, Ben,' she replied.
'You... you—' He stopped shouting and his mouth
dropped open as he saw Dickon pushing a boy in a
wheelchair over the grass towards him.
'Do you know who I am?' asked the boy in the chair.
Old Ben stared. 'You've got your mother's eyes,' he said
in a shaking voice. 'Yes, I know you. You're Mr Craven's
son, the little boy with the crooked back.'
Colin forgot that he had ever had backache. 'My back's
as straight as yours is!' he shouted.
Ben stared and stared. He only knew what he had heard
from the servants. 'You haven't got a crooked back?' he
asked. 'Or crooked legs?'
That was too much. Colin was furious, and it made him
feel strong.
48
Colin and the garden
'Come here, Dickon!' he shouted, and threw off his
blanket. Dickon was by his side in a second. Mary felt sick
with fear. Could Colin stand?
Then Colin's thin feet were on the grass and he was
standing, holding Dickon's arm. He looked strangely tall,
and he held his head very high.
'Look at me!' he shouted at Ben. 'Just look at me!'
'He's as straight as any boy in Yorkshire!' said Dickon.
Tears were running down Ben's brown old face. 'They
said you were going to die!' he whispered.
'Well, you can see that's not true,' said Colin. 'Now, get
down from the wall and come here. I want to talk to you.
You've got to help us keep the garden a secret.'
'Yes, sir,' said old Ben, as he dried his eyes.
'Look at me!' Colin shouted at Ben. 'Just took at me!'
49 
The Secret Garden
That was the first of many beautiful afternoons in the
secret garden. Colin was brought there by Dickon and
Mary nearly every day, and he saw all the changes that
happened there during the spring and early summer. Ben
Weatherstaff, now in the secret, joined them as often as he
could.
One day Colin spoke to all of them. 'Listen, everybody.
I think there's something like magic that makes gardens
grow and things happen. Perhaps if I believe in it, the magic
will make me strong. Let's all sit down in a circle and ask
the magic to work.'
So they all sat on the grass in a circle, Dickon with his
crow, his fox and the two squirrels, Mary, Colin, and Ben.
Colin repeated these words several times, 'The sun's shining.
That's the magic. Being strong. That's the magic. Magic!
Help me! Magic! Help me!'
At last Colin stopped. 'Now I'm going to walk round the
garden,' he said, and took Dickon's arm. Slowly he walked
from one wall to another, followed closely by Mary and
Ben. And when he had walked all the way round, he said,
'You see! I can walk now! The magic worked!'
'It's wonderful!' cried Mary. 'Your father will think he is
dreaming when he sees you!'
'I won't tell him yet. I'm going to keep it a secret from
everybody. I'll come to the garden and walk and run a little
more every day until I'm as healthy as any other boy. Then,
when my father comes home, I'll walk up to him and say,
"Here I am, Father. You see? I'm not going to die!"
50
Colin and the garden
Now began a difficult time for Colin and Mary. Dickon
told his mother about it one evening as he was digging the
cottage garden.
'You see, mother, they don't want the doctor or the
servants to guess that Colin can walk and is getting better.
So they have to pretend he's still ill and just as disagreeable
as he used to be!'
'If they're running about all day in the fresh air, that'll
make them hungry, I should think!'
'Yes, that's the problem. They're both getting fatter and
healthier, and they really enjoy their food now. But they
have to send some of it back to the kitchen, uneaten. If they
cat it all, people will realize how healthy they are! Sometimes
they're very hungry!'
'I know what we can do,' said Mrs Sowerby. 'You can
lake some fresh milk and some of my newly baked
bread to the garden in the mornings. If they have that, it'll
do them a lot of good! What
a game those children are
playing!' And she laughed
and tears came to her eyes.
One afternoon when they
were all working in the
garden, the door opened and
a woman came quietly in.
'It's Mother!' cried
Dickon, and ran towards
her. '1 told her where the 'It's Mother!'
51 
The Secret Garden
door was, because I knew she would keep the secret.'
Colin held out his hand to her. 'I've wanted to see you for
a long time,'he said.
'Dear boy!' Susan Sowerby whispered, holding his hand.
'You're so like your mother!'
'Do you think.' asked Colin carefully, 'that will make my
father like me?'
'I'm sure it will,' she answered warmly. 'He must see you
- he must come home now.'
'You see how healthy the boy is, Susan?' asked old Ben.
'Look how strong and straight his legs are now!'
'Yes,' she laughed. 'Playing and working outside, and
eating good Yorkshire food, has made him strong. And
Miss Mary too,' she added, turning to Mary. 'Mrs Medlock
heard that your mother was a pretty woman. You'll soon
be as pretty as she was.'
'Do you believe in magic?' Colin asked her.
'I do,' she answered,' but everybody gives it a different
name. It makes the sun shine and the seeds grow - and it has
made you healthy.'
She sat down on the grass and stayed for a while, talking
and laughing with the children in the quiet, sunny garden.
When she stood up to leave, Colin suddenly put out a hand
to her.
'I wish - you were my mother!' he whispered.
Mrs Sowerby put her arms round him and held him to
her. 'Dear boy! You're as close to your mother as you could
be, here in her garden. And your father'll come back soon!'
8
Mr Craven comes home
W
hile the secret garden was returning to life, a man
with high crooked shoulders was wandering round
the most beautiful places in Europe. For ten years he had
lived this lonely life his heart full of sadness and his head
full of dark dreams. Everywhere he went, he carried his
unhappiness with him like a black cloud. Other travellers
thought he was half mad or a man who could not forget
some terrible crime. His name was Archibald Craven.
But one day, as he sat by a mountain stream, he actually
looked at a flower, and for the first time in ten years he
realized how beautiful something living could be. The
valley seemed very quiet as he sat there, staring at the
Mower. He felt strangely calm.
But one day, as he sat by a mountain stream,
he actually looked at a flower.
53 
The Secret Garden
'What is happening to me?' he whispered. 'I feel different
-I almost feel I'm alive again!'
At that moment, hundreds of miles away in Yorkshire,
Colin was seeing the secret garden for the first time, and
saying, 'I'm going to live for ever and ever and ever!' But Mr
Craven did not know this.
That night, in his hotel room, he slept better than usual.
As the weeks passed, he even began to think a little about
his home and his son. One evening in late summer, as he
was sitting quietly beside a lake, he felt the strange calmness
again. He fell asleep, and had a dream that seemed very
real. He heard a voice calling him. It was sweet and clear
and happy, the voice of his young wife.
'Archie! Archie! Archie!'
'My dear!' He jumped up. 'Where are you?'
'In the garden!' called the beautiful voice.
And then the dream ended. In the morning, when he
woke, he remembered the dream.
'She says she's in the garden!' he thought. 'But the door's
locked and the key's buried.'
That morning he received a letter from Susan Sowerby.
In it she asked him to come home, but she did not give a
reason. Mr Craven thought of his dream, and decided to
return to England immediately. On the long journey back
to Yorkshire, he was thinking about Colin.
'I wonder how he is! I wanted to forget him, because he
makes me think of his mother. He lived, and she died! But
perhaps I've been wrong. Susan Sowerby says I should go
54
Mr Craven comes home
home, so perhaps she thinks I can help him.'
When he arrived home, he found the housekeeper very
confused about Colin's health.
'He's very strange, sir,' said Mrs Medlock. 'He looks
better, it's true, but some days he eats nothing at all, and
other days he eats just like a healthy boy. He used to scream
even at the idea of fresh air, but now he spends all his time
outside in his wheelchair, with Miss Mary and Dickon
Sowerby. He's in the garden at the moment.'
'In the garden!' repeated Mr Craven. Those were the
words of the dream! He hurried out of the house and
towards the place which he had not visited for so long. He
found the door with the climbing plant over it, and stood
outside, listening, for a moment.
'Surely I can hear voices inside the garden?' he thought.
'Aren't there children whispering, laughing, running in
there? Or am I going mad?'
And then the moment came, when the children could not
stay quiet. There was wild laughing and shouting, and the
door was thrown open. A boy ran out, a tall, healthy,
handsome boy, straight into the man's arms. Mr Craven
stared into the boy's laughing eyes.
'Who -What? Who?' he cried.
Colin had not planned to meet his father like this. But
perhaps this was the best way, to come running out with his
cousin and his friend.
'Father,' he said, 'I'm Colin. You can't believe it! I can't
believe it myself. It was the garden, and Mary and Dickon
55 
The Secret Garden
A boy ran out, a tall, healthy, handsome boy,
straight into the man's arms.
56
Mr Craven comes home
and the magic, that made me well. We've kept it a secret up
to now. Aren't you happy, Father? I'm going to live for ever
and ever and ever!'
Mr Craven put his hands on the boy's shoulders. For a
moment he could not speak. 'Take me into the garden, my
boy,' he said at last, 'and tell me all about it.'
And in the secret garden, where the roses were at their
best, and the butterflies were flying from flower to flower in
the summer sunshine, they told Colin's father their story.
Sometimes he laughed and sometimes he cried, but most of
the time he just looked, unbelieving, into the handsome
face of the son that he had almost forgotten.
'Now,' said Colin at the end, 'it isn't a secret any more.
I'll never use the wheelchair again. I'm going to walk back
with you, Father - to the house.'
And so, that afternoon, Mrs Medlock, Martha, and the
other servants had the greatest shock of their lives. Through
the gardens towards the house came Mr Craven, looking
happier than they had ever seen him. And by his side, with
his shoulders straight, his head held high and a smile on his
lips, walked young Colin! 
Exercises
A Checking your understanding
Chapter 1 Who said these words in the story?
1 'We must leave soon!'
2 'Why was I forgotten?'
3 'He's got a crooked back, and he's horrid!'
4 'You must stay out of his way!'
Chapter 2 Who in this chapter...
1 ... was cleaning the fireplace in Mary's bedroom?
2 ... knew a lot about wild animals?
3 ... buried the key to the secret garden?
4 ... was a Yorkshire moor man?
Chapters 3-4 Are these sentences true (T) or false (F)?
1 The door to the secret garden was locked nine years ago.
2 Martha went to visit her family for a week.
3 Mrs Sowerby bought a skipping-rope for Mary.
4 Ben's favourite flowers were roses.
Chapters 5-6 Find answers to these questions in the text.
1 How did Mary find Colin's room?
2 Why was the robin so busy in the garden?
3 Why did Mary look at Colin's back?
Chapters 7-8 Write answers to these questions.
1 Why did Colin get better?
2 Who spoke to Mr Craven in his dream?
3 Why did Mr Craven decide to come home?
58
Exercises
B Working with language
1 Put together these beginnings and endings of sentences. Check
your answers in Chapter 3.
1 Mary felt lonelier than ever... 7 ... she noticed something
2 I like Dickon, ... almost buried there.
3 Are things growing in the 8 ... where he lives?
garden ... 9 ... when Martha had gone.
4 Before she came to Yorkshire ... 10 ... although I've never seen
5 As Mary looked at the hole,... him.
6 She hoped ... 1 1 ... they weren't all dead,
12..-she had not liked anybody.
2 Complete these sentences with information from the. story.
1 Mr Craven buried the key to the secret garden because ...
2 Mrs Medlock was angry with Mary when ...
3 When Mary asked her uncle for a bit of garden, he ...
4 Colin's legs were not very strongs but...
5 While Colin was becoming healthier, his father ...
6 Colin told his father the story, and then ...
C Activities
1 You are Colin. Write his diary for the day when he first visited the
secret garden.
2 Which person do you like, or dislike, most in the story? Why?
Write a few sentences to describe this person.
3 What do you think will happen to Mary, Colin, and Dickon in ten
years' time? Write another paragraph to finish the story. You
could begin like this;
When Colin and Mary were twenty, they still lived at Misselthwaite
Manor...
59 
Glossary
angel a messenger from God, or a very good person
bad-tempered often cross and angry
bury (past tense buried) to put a person or thing in the ground
confused not able to think clearly, or to understand something
cousin the child of your uncle or aunt
dialect a different way of speaking the same language in a
different part of a country (e.g. Yorkshire)
disagreeable not pleasing; bad-tempered
furious very angry
handsome good-looking (usually for a boy or a man)
hop (past tense hopped) to jump on one foot
horrid bad, terrible, not at all nice
magic something strange that can make wonderful, unusual
things happen
shocked very surprised (by something unpleasant)
skip (past tense skipped) to jump again and again over a rope that
you are swinging
stare to look at someone for a long time
tears drops of water that come from your eyes when you cry
ugly not beautiful
wander to walk slowly with no special plan
whisper to speak very softly and quietly
YORKSHIRE DIALECT USED IN THIS STORY
Tha' canna' dress thysen? You can't dress yourself?
Does tha' like me? Do you like me?
I likes thee wonderful. I like you wonderfully,
We mun get poor Colin out here in th' sunshine, an' we munnot lose
no time about it. We must get poor Colin out here in the sunshine,
and we mustn't lose any time about it.
60 