The Snowy Day

Ezra Jack Keats


Narrator 1, Narrator 2, Narrator 3, Narrator 4, Narrator 5, Peter, Friend, Mother
Narrator 1: One winter morning Peter woke up and looked out the window. Snow had fallen
during the night.
Peter: It’s covered everything, as far as I can see!
Narrator 2: said Peter.
Narrator 3: After breakfast he put on his snowsuit and ran outside. The snow was piled up very
high along the street to make a path for walking.
Peter: Crunch, crunch, crunch,
Narrator 4: said Peter, repeating the sound that his feet made as they sank into the snow.
Narrator 5: He walked with his toes pointed out, then he walked with his toes point in…watching
behind him as he went.
Narrator 1: The he dragged his feet s-l-o-w-l-y to make tracks.
Narrator 2: And he found something sticking out of the snow that made a new track.
Peter: A stick!
Narrator 3: A stick that was just right for smacking a snow-covered tree.
Narrator 4: Down fell the snow-plop!-on top of Peter’s head.
Peter: Oomph!
Narrator 5: He thought it would fun to join the big boys in their snowball fight.
Peter: I’m not old enough-not yet.
Narrator 1: So he made a smiling snowman, and he made angels.
Narrator 2: He pretended he was a mountain-climber. He climbed up a great big tall heaping
mountain of snowPeter: I am king of the mountain!
Narrator 3: and slid all the way down.
Peter: Wheeeeeee!
Narrator 4: He picked up a handful of snow-and another, and still another. He packed it round
and firm and put the snowball in his pocket.
Peter: I’ll save that for tomorrow.
Narrator 5: said Peter, then he went into his warm house.
Narrator 1: He told his mother all about his adventures while she took off his wet socks. She said
to him,
Mother: You’ve had quite a day! Let’s get you all warmed up in a hot bath.
Narrator 2: Peter thought and thought and thought about his wonderful adventures.
Narrator 3: Before he got into bed he looked in his pocket.
Peter: Hey, where did it go?
Narrator 4: His pocket was empty. The snowball wasn’t there. He felt very sad. He went to sleep.
Narrator 5: While he slept, he dreamed that the sun had melted all the snow away.
Narrator 1: But when he woke up his dream was gone.
Peter: Shwoo!
Narrator 2: The snow was still everywhere.
Peter: New snow is falling!
Narrator 3: After breakfast he called to his friend from across the hall,
Peter: Do you want to go play outside with me?
Friend: Sure!
Narrator 4: his friend called back,
Narrator 5: and they went out together into the deep, deep snow.